=head1 NAME

ly2dvi - convert mudela to DVI

=head1 SYNOPSIS

	ly2dvi [options] inputfile[.ly] [....]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

ly2dvi is a shell script which creates input file for LaTeX,
based on information from the output files from lilypond.
The script handles multiple files. If a mudela file name is
specified lilypond is run to make an output (TeX) file.

One or more LaTeX files are created, based on information found
in the output (TeX) files, and latex is finally run to create
one or more DVI files.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 5

=item B<-D,--debug>

Set debug mode. There are two levels - in level one some debug
info is written, in level two the command C<set -x> is run, which
echoes every command in the ly2dvi script.

=item B<-O,--orientation=>

Set orientation - portrait is the default.
(C<-O> landscape produces C<\usepackage[landscape]{article}>)

=item B<-o,--output=>

Set output directory.

=item B<-h,--help>

Print help.

=item B<-k,--keep>

Keep the LaTeX file after the run.

=item B<-K>

Keep LilyPond output after the run.

=item B<-l,--language>

Specify LaTeX language.
(C<-l norsk> produces C<\usepackage[norsk]{babel}>).

=item B<-p,--papersize=>

Specify papersize.
(C<-p a4paper> produces C<\usepackage[a4paper]{article}>)

=item B<-s,--separate>

Normally all output files are included into one LaTeX file.
With this switch all files are run separately, to produce one
DVI file for each.

=back

=head1 FEATURES

ly2dvi responds to several parameters specified in the mudela
file. They are overridden by corresponding command line options.

=over 5

=item B<papersize>

Specify papersize.

=item B<orientation>

Set orientation.

=item B<language>

Specify LaTeX language

=item B<paperlinewidth>

Specify the width (pt, mm or cm) of the printed lines.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 5

=item B<LILYINCLUDE>

Additional directories for input files.

=item B<TMP>

Temporary directory name. Default is /tmp

=back

=head1 FILES

F<titledefs.tex> is inspected for definitions used to extract
additional text definitions from the mudela file. In the current
version the following are defined:

=over 5

=item B<title>

The title of the music. Centered on top of the first page.

=item B<subtitle>

Subtitle, centered below the title.

=item B<composer>

Name of the composer, rightflushed below the subtitle.

=item B<arranger>

Name of the arranger, rightflushed below the composer.

=item B<instrument>

Name of the instrument, leftflushed at same level as the composer.

=back

F</usr/local/share/lilyrc /etc/lilyrc $HOME/.lilyrc ./.lilyrc>
are files to set up default running conditions/variables, Bourne shell
syntax. All files are parsed, in the shown sequence. The variables are
overridden by variables in the mudela file, and by command line options.
In the current version the following are allowed:

=over 5

=item B<ORIENTATION>

Set orientation - portrait is the default.

=item B<LANGUAGE>

Specify LaTeX language.

=item B<OUTPUTDIR>

Set output directory.

=item B<PAPERSIZE>

Specify papersize.

=item B<LILYINCLUDE>

Additional directories for input files.

=item B<TMP>

Temporary directory name.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

lilypond(1), tex(1), latex(1)

=head1 AUTHOR

Jan Arne Fagertun <Jan.A.Fagertun@energy.sintef.no>,
http://www.termo.unit.no/mtf/people/janaf/

=head1 BUGS

If you have found a bug, you should send a bugreport.

=over 4

=item *
Send a copy of the input which causes the error.

=item *
Send a description of the platform you use.

=item *
Send a description of the LilyPond and ly2dvi version you use.

=item *
Send a description of the bug itself.

=item *
Send it to bug-gnu-music@gnu.org (you don't have to subscribe
to this mailinglist).

=back

=head1 REMARKS

Only one papersize is supported, A4. Information on other sizes
(LaTeX names, horizontal and vertical sizes) should be mailed to
the author or to the mailing list.

