=head1 NAME

mi2mu - convert MIDI to mudela(5)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

	mi2mu [options] midi-file

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Mi2mu translates a MIDI input file to Mudela (GNU LilyPond source
format).  Mi2mu is part of the GNU LilyPond music typesetting package.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-b, --no-quantify>,

Write exact durations, e.g.: `a4*385/384'.

=item B<-d, --debug>,

Print lots of debugging stuff.

=item B<-h, --help>,

Show a summary of usage.

=item B<-I, --include>=F<DIR>,

Add DIR to search path.

=item B<-k, --key>=ACC[:MINOR],

Set default key.  ACC > 0 sets number of sharps; ACC < 0 sets number 
of flats.  A minor key is indicated by ":1".

=item B<-n, --no-silly>,

Assume no plets or double dots, assume smallest (reciprocal) duration 16.

=item B<-o, --output>=F<FILE>,

Set FILE as default output.

=item B<-p, --no-plets>,

Assume no plets.

=item B<-q, --quiet>,

Be quiet.

=item B<-s, --smallest=N>,

Assume no shorter (reciprocal) durations than N.

=item B<-v, --verbose>,

Be verbose.

=item B<-w, --warranty>,

Show the warranty with which mi2mu comes. (It comes with B<NO WARRANTY>!)

=item B<-x, --no-double-dots>,

Assume no double dotted notes.

=back

=head1 FEATURES

This is an overview of the features that Mi2mu supports.

=over 4

=item *

[todo]

=back

=head1
DISCLAIMER & COPYING POLICY

Mi2mu is copyright 1996, 1997 by its authors. Mi2mu is distributed 
as part of GNU LilyPond, under the terms of the GNU General Public
License.  Mi2mu is provided without any warranty what so ever.
Mi2mu may be freely distributed.  For further information consult
the GNU General Public License, from the file F<COPYING>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Please consult the documentation file AUTHORS for more detailed
information, and small contributions. 

=over 4

=item *

Jan Nieuwenhuizen <jan@digicash.com>,  http://www.digicash.com/~jan.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item lilypond(1)

The GNU LilyPond music typesetter.

=item mudela-man

On the input format. This is a LilyPond-enhanced LaTeX document.

=back

