\input texinfo-ja @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; documentlanguage: ja -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: 5a886a7c8348e53e52ce65f4d8e9e197db3d5103

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  For details, see the Contributors'
    Guide, node Updating translation committishes..
@end ignore

@setfilename web.info
@settitle LilyPond -- みんなの楽譜作成
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage ja
@afourpaper

@set FDL
@set web
@include ja/macros.itexi
@include weblinks.itexi


@c Translators: Tomohiro Tatejima, Masamichi Hosoda, Yoshiki Sawada, Yoshinobu Ishizaki

@c `Web' was born 2003-03-30 with this commit:
@c Initial revision
@c author: Han-Wen Nienhuys
@c commit: d189a2119004c2f75da2020ea2ed36d817582fc5

@c @macro copyrightDeclare
@c Copyright @copyright{} 2003--2022 by the authors.
@c @end macro

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2003--2022 by the authors.

@c next line is necessary for broken pre-4.13 texinfo's
@c install-info, so leave it there until we officially
@c bump the required version.  -gp
このファイルは LilyPond Web サイトのドキュメントです。

@quotation
GNU フリー文書利用許諾契約書バージョン 1.1 またはフリー ソフトウェア財団によって
発行されたその後のバージョンの約定に従う限り、このドキュメントを複製、変更する
許可を与えます。
変更不可部分はありません。
この利用許諾契約書のコピーは ``GNU フリー文書利用許諾契約書'' という章に含まれて
います。
@end quotation
@end copying


@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory GNU LilyPond --- 楽譜譜刻プログラム
@direntry
* 変更点: (lilypond-changes).               バージョン 2.20 以降の新機能。
* 貢献者向けガイド: (lilypond-contributor). LilyPond への貢献方法。
* エッセー: (lilypond-essay).               LilyPond の理念。
* 拡張: (lilypond-extending).               LilyPond での Scheme の使い方。
* 内部リファレンス: (lilypond-internals).   調整リファレンス。
* 学習マニュアル: (lilypond-learning).      紹介。ここから始めてください。
* 音楽用語集: (music-glossary).             非英語圏のユーザ向け。
* 記譜法: (lilypond-notation).              記譜法リファレンス。
* コード断片集: (lilypond-snippets).        ちょっとしたテクニック、TIPS、@c
それに例。
* 使用方法: (lilypond-usage).               アプリケーションをインスール@c
して、実行する方法。
* ウェブサイト: (lilypond-web).             Info バージョンの lilypond.org。
@end direntry

@dircategory LilyPond アプリケーション
@direntry
* abc2ly: (lilypond-usage)abc2ly を呼び出す.                   ABC のファイルをインポートする。
* convert-ly: (lilypond-usage)convert-ly でファイルを更新する. 古い LilyPond 向けファイルを扱う。
* etf2ly: (lilypond-usage)etf2ly を呼び出す.                   Finale のファイルをインポートする。
* lilypond-book: (lilypond-usage)lilypond-book.                文章と楽譜を統合する。
* lilypond: (lilypond-usage)lilypond を実行する.               LilyPond を呼び出す。
* midi2ly: (lilypond-usage)midi2ly を呼び出す.                 MIDI ファイルをインポートする。
* musicxml2ly: (lilypond-usage)musicxml2ly を呼び出す.         MusicXML ファイルをインポートする。
@end direntry


@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@c This is intentionally blank because we have @settitle above
@top
@end ifnottex


@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle 楽譜譜刻プログラム
@titlefont{全般的な情報}
@author LilyPond 開発チーム

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying

LilyPond バージョン @version{} 用
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html


@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@ifhtml
@node index
@unnumbered LilyPond
@end ifhtml

@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... みんなの楽譜作成
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
LilyPond は、可能な限り高品位な楽譜を生み出すことを目的とする、@c
オープン ソースの楽譜作成プログラムです。@c
このフリー ソフトウェアは、伝統的な彫版の楽譜の美しさを@c
コンピュータ プリントアウトで実現します。@c
LilyPond はフリーソフトウェアであり、@uref{https://gnu.org,GNU プロジェクト}
の一部です。


@divClass{align-right}
@ref{導入部} を読んで、LilyPond をもっと知ってください！

@divEnd
@divEnd


@divId{homepage-main}

@divClass{column-center-top}

@subheading 美しい楽譜

@c This example image is the image from the website version of the essay
@c manual, downloaded to the pictures directory for use on the home page.
@c Large version is generated manually from ly file in pictures directory.
@divId{homepage-example-image-wrapper}
@imageClickable{bwv861-lilypond,png,,bwv861-lilypond-large,png,center}
@divEnd

@ifclear web_version
  @c no anchor links, just text

LilyPond は、いかなる種類の譜刻にも対応できる、@c
強力で、自由度の高いツールです。@c
例えば、クラシック音楽（J. S. Bach 作の上の例のように）、@c
複雑な楽譜、古楽、現代音楽、タブ譜、声楽、リード譜、教材、@c
大きなオーケストラプロジェクト、カスタマイズされた出力、@c
さらに Schenker graphs にも使えます。

@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c anchor links, link to individual examples by their <a> tag

LilyPond は、いかなる種類の譜刻にも対応できる、@c
強力で、自由度の高いツールです。@c
例えば、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_30af_30e9_30b7_30c3_30af_97f3_697d, クラシック音楽}
（J. S. Bach 作の上の例のように）、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_8907_96d1_306a_697d_8b5c, 複雑な楽譜}、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_53e4_697d, 古楽}、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_73fe_4ee3_97f3_697d, 現代音楽}、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_30bf_30d6_8b5c, タブ譜}、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_58f0_697d, 声楽}、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_30ea_30fc_30c9_8b5c, リード譜}、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_6559_80b2, 教材}、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_5927_304d_306a_30d7_30ed_30b8_30a7_30af_30c8, 大きなオーケストラプロジェクト}、
@uref{examples.html#g_t_30ab_30b9_30bf_30de_30a4_30ba, カスタマイズされた出力}、
さらに
@uref{examples.html#Schenker-Graphs, Schenker graphs}
にも使えます。

@end ifset

楽譜の @ref{例} を見て、刺激を受けてください！

@divEnd

@divClass{column-center-middle-color2}
@subheading ニュース

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include en/web/news-headlines.itexi

@ref{News, その他のニュース...}

@divEnd

@divEnd


@ifclear web_version
  @c do nothing
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c make the side bar:
@divId{homepage-sidebar}
@subheading 安定版

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@ref{Download, ダウンロード @versionStable}

@ref{マニュアル, マニュアル @versionStable}

@subheading 開発版

@ref{開発, ダウンロード @versionDevel}

@ref{開発, マニュアル @versionDevel}

@subheading Pondings
@divId{pondingsText}

@divEnd

@divEnd
@end ifset


@html

<script language="JavaScript" type="text/javascript">
  function loadXMLDoc(dname)
    {
      if (window.XMLHttpRequest)
        {
          xhttp=new XMLHttpRequest();
        }
      else
        {
          xhttp=new ActiveXObject("Microsoft.XMLHTTP");
        }
      xhttp.open("GET",dname,false);
      xhttp.send();
      return xhttp.responseXML;
    }

  var xmlDoc = loadXMLDoc("tweets.xml");
  var tweets = xmlDoc.getElementsByTagName("tweet");
  var index = Math.floor(Math.random() * tweets.length);
  var tweet = tweets[index];
  var text = tweet.childNodes[0];
  document.getElementById("pondingsText").innerHTML = text.nodeValue;
</script>

@end html


@ifnottex

@divClass{hide}
@menu
* 導入部::               ここから始めて、楽譜を作ってください。
* Download::         LilyPond の入手方法。
* マニュアル::           マニュアルを読んでください。
* コミュニティ::         他のユーザとの交流。
@end menu
@divEnd

@end ifnottex

@contents

@iftex
@allowcodebreaks false
@end iftex

@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the `lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond'
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@end ignore

@c FIXME: this still doesn't solve the broken links in pdf and big
@c        html; we'll need a bunch of @iftext and stuff in here. -gp
@c ****************** SPECIAL MACROS FOR WEB MANUAL ************
@macro docLinks{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}
@subheading お読みください

@docLinksBare{\name\,\base\,\refLink\,\split\,\big\,\pdf\}

@end macro


@macro docLinkSplit{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (ページ毎に分割された HTML),\base\/index.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkBig{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (1 つの大きな HTML),\base\-big-page.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkPdf{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\base\.pdf,\base\.pdf,\webLink\}
@end macro


@macro docLinksBare{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}

@divClass{keep-bullets}
@itemize

@item @docLinkSplit{\name\,\base\,\split\} @minus{}
  このマニュアルはいくつもの HTML ページに分割されています。
  @*@ @ @emph{(ページ毎の小さなダウンロード)}

@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} @minus{}
  このマニュアルは 1 つの巨大な HTML ページです。
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(大きな単一のダウンロード, \base\-big-page.html, )}}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} @minus{}
  日本語では PDF 形式での提供はありません。
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(大きな単一のダウンロード, \base\.pdf, )}}

@end itemize

@divEnd

@end macro


@c don't add any extra spaces in this macro -gp
@macro ifWebLinks{webLink,normalLink}
@ifclear web_version
  \normalLink\:
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  \webLink\:
@end ifset
@end macro


@ifhtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}

@divClass{heading-center}
@divClass{contactBox}
ここにリストアップされていない他の\topic\についてご存知の場合、@c
bug-lilypond メーリング リストにメッセージを送ってお知らせください。@c
まだ購読していない場合は、リストの
@uref{https://lists.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-lilypond,info ページ}
から行うことができます。

@divEnd
@divEnd

@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}
@cartouche
ここにリストアップされていない他の\topic\についてご存知の場合、@c
@ref{Bug reports} の手順に従ってお知らせください。

@end cartouche

@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@include ja/web/introduction.itexi
@include en/web/download.itexi
@include ja/web/manuals.itexi
@include ja/web/community.itexi


@bye
