\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; documentlanguage: hu -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: 46ec3bd9ded640faef62938929a0af97345cf955

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  For details, see the Contributors'
    Guide, node Updating translation committishes..
@end ignore

@setfilename web.info
@settitle LilyPond -- kottaszedés mindenkinek
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage hu
@afourpaper

@c Translators: Harmath Dénes

@c `Web' was imported 2009-08-05 with git commit b938d71...
@c @macro copyrightDeclare
@c Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2022 by the authors.
@c @end macro

@set FDL
@set web
@include hu/macros.itexi
@include weblinks.itexi

@afourpaper


@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2022 by the authors.

@c next line is necessary for broken pre-4.13 texinfo's
@c install-info, so leave it there until we officially
@c bump the required version.  -gp
This file documents the LilyPond website.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end quotation
@end copying


@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory GNU LilyPond --- the music typesetter
@direntry
* Tankönyv: (lilypond-learning).  Itt kezdd az olvasást.
* Fogalomtár: (music-glossary).               Többnyelvű szószedet.
* Kottaírás: (lilypond-notation).                           A kottaírás kézikönyve.
* Kódrészletek: (lilypond-snippets).         Tippek, trükkök, példák.
* Belső működés: (lilypond-internals).  A belső működés referenciája.
* Használat: (lilypond-usage). Az alkalmazás használata.
* Web: (lilypond-web).    A weboldal.
* lilypond: (lilypond-usage)A lilypond futtatása.      Kották szedése.
* abc2ly: (lilypond-usage)Az abc2ly futtatása.      ABC fájlok importálása.
* convert-ly: (lilypond-usage)A convert-ly futtatása. Konvertálás régebbi verziókról.
* etf2ly: (lilypond-usage)Az etf2ly futtatása.      Finale fájlok importálása.
* lilypond-book: (lilypond-usage)A lilypond-book futtatása. Szöveg és zene integrálása.
* midi2ly: (lilypond-usage)A midi2ly futtatása.    MIDI fájlok importálása.
* musicxml2ly: (lilypond-usage)A musicxml2ly futtatása.  MusicXML fájlok importálása.
@end direntry


@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@c This is intentionally blank because we have @settitle above
@top
@end ifnottex


@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle A kottaszedő program
@titlefont{Általános információk}
@author A LilyPond fejlesztőcsapat

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying

Verzió: @version{}
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html


@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@ifhtml
@node index
@unnumbered LilyPond
@end ifhtml

@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

...kottaszedés mindenkinek
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}

A LilyPond egy nyílt forrású kottaszedő program,
mely a lehető legjobb minőségű kotta előállítására képes.
Ez a szabad szoftver a hagyományos, kézzel szedett kották
szépségét adja vissza.

@divClass{align-right}
Ha többet akarsz róla megtudni, olvasd el a @ref{Bevezetés}t!

@divEnd
@divEnd

@divClass{separator}
@divEnd


@divId{news}

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include en/web/news-headlines.itexi

@divClass{float-right}
(@ref{Hírarchívum})
@divEnd

@divEnd

@ifclear web_version
  @c do nothing
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c make the side bar:
@divId{homePageSideBar}
@subheading Stabil változat

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@ref{Download, Letöltés @versionStable}

@ref{Dokumentáció, Dokumentáció @versionStable}

@subheading Fejlesztői változat

@ref{Fejlesztés, Letöltés @versionDevel}

@ref{Fejlesztés, Dokumentáció @versionDevel}

@subheading Aktuális
@divId{pondingsText}

@divEnd

@divEnd
@end ifset

@html

<script language="JavaScript" type="text/javascript">
  function loadXMLDoc(dname)
    {
      if (window.XMLHttpRequest)
        {
          xhttp=new XMLHttpRequest();
        }
      else
        {
          xhttp=new ActiveXObject("Microsoft.XMLHTTP");
        }
      xhttp.open("GET",dname,false);
      xhttp.send();
      return xhttp.responseXML;
    }

  var xmlDoc = loadXMLDoc("tweets.xml");
  var tweets = xmlDoc.getElementsByTagName("tweet");
  var index = Math.floor(Math.random() * tweets.length);
  var tweet = tweets[index];
  var text = tweet.childNodes[0];
  document.getElementById("pondingsText").innerHTML = text.nodeValue;
</script>

@end html

@ifnottex

@divClass{hide}
@menu
* Bevezetés:: Itt kezdd az olvasást!
* Download:: Szerezd meg a LilyPondot!
* Dokumentáció:: Olvasd el a kézikönyveket!
* Közösség:: Lépj kapcsolatba más felhasználókkal!
@end menu
@divEnd

@end ifnottex

@contents

@iftex
@allowcodebreaks false
@end iftex

@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the `lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond'
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@end ignore

@c FIXME: this still doesn't solve the broken links in pdf and big
@c        html; we'll need a bunch of @iftext and stuff in here. -gp
@c ****************** SPECIAL MACROS FOR WEB MANUAL ************
@macro docLinks{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}
@subheading Olvasd el

@docLinksBare{\name\,\base\,\refLink\,\split\,\big\,\pdf\}

@end macro


@macro docLinkSplit{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (HTML oldalak),\base\/index.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkBig{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (egy nagy HTML oldal),\base\-big-page.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkPdf{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\base\.pdf,\base\.pdf,\webLink\}
@end macro


@macro docLinksBare{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}

@divClass{keep-bullets}
@itemize

@item @docLinkSplit{\name\,\base\,\split\} @minus{}
  megtekintés sok HTML oldalra elosztva.
  @*@ @ @emph{(oldalanként egy-egy kis letöltés)}

@c That comma is a nightmare
@ifnothtml
@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} @minus{}
  megtekintés egy nagy HTML oldalként.
  @*@ @ @emph{(egyszeri, nagy letöltés)}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} @minus{}
  letöltés PDF formátumban.
  @*@ @ @emph{(egyszeri, nagy letöltés)}
@end ifnothtml
@ifhtml
@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} @minus{}
  megtekintés egy nagy HTML oldalként.
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(egyszeri&#44; nagy letöltés, \base\-big-page.html, )}}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} @minus{}
  letöltés PDF formátumban.
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(egyszeri&#44; nagy letöltés, \base\.pdf, )}}
@end ifhtml

@end itemize

@divEnd

@end macro


@c don't add any extra spaces in this macro -gp
@macro ifWebLinks{webLink,normalLink}
@ifclear web_version
  \normalLink\:
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  \webLink\:
@end ifset
@end macro


@ifhtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}

@divClass{heading-center}
@divClass{contactBox}
If you are aware of any other \topic\ which could be listed here,
please let us know by following the instructions on
@ref{Bug reports}.

@divEnd
@divEnd

@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}
@cartouche
If you are aware of any other \topic\ which could be listed here,
please let us know by following the instructions on
@ref{Bug reports}.

@end cartouche

@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@include hu/web/introduction.itexi
@include en/web/download.itexi
@include hu/web/manuals.itexi
@include hu/web/community.itexi


@bye
