\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; documentlanguage: tr -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: 34f932f6b2a5e5520202b8319720ff62c532de0f

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  For details, see the Contributors'
    Guide, node Updating translation committishes..
@end ignore

@settitle LilyPond -- Herkes için müzik notasyonu
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage tr
@afourpaper

@set FDL
@set web
@include tr/macros.itexi
@include weblinks.itexi


@c 'Web' was born 2003-03-30 with this commit:
@c Initial revision
@c author: Han-Wen Nienhuys
@c commit: d189a2119004c2f75da2020ea2ed36d817582fc5

@c @macro copyrightDeclare
@c Copyright @copyright{} 2003--2023 by the authors.
@c @end macro

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2003--2023 by the authors.

@c next line is necessary for broken pre-4.13 texinfo's
@c install-info, so leave it there until we officially
@c bump the required version.  -gp
This file documents the LilyPond website.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end quotation
@end copying


@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory LilyPond -- müzik dizgici
@direntry
* Web sitesi: (lilypond-web).               Lilypond.org'un bilgi sürümü.
@end direntry


@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@c This must exactly match @settitle above.
@top LilyPond -- Herkes için müzik notasyonu
@end ifnottex


@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle Müzik dizgici
@titlefont{Genel Bilgi}
@author Lilypond geliştirici takımı

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying

For LilyPond version @version{}
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html


@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@ifhtml
@node index
@unnumbered LilyPond
@end ifhtml

@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... herkes için müzik notasyonu
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
LilyPond olası en yüksek kalitede nota kağıdı üretmeye adanmış bir
müzik notasyon programıdır.  Geleneksel olarak notasyon edilmiş müzik
estetiğini bilgisayar çıktılarına taşır.  Lilypond ücretsiz bir yazılımdır
ve @uref{https://gnu.org,GNU Projesi} nin bir parçasıdır.


@divClass{align-right}
Daha fazlasını okumak için @ref{Introduction}!

@divEnd
@divEnd


@divId{homepage-main}

@divClass{column-center-top}

@subheading Güzel Nota Kağıdı

@c This example image is the image from the website version of the essay
@c manual, downloaded to the pictures directory for use on the home page.
@c Large version is generated manually from ly file in pictures directory.
@divId{homepage-example-image-wrapper}
@imageClickable{bwv861-lilypond,png,,bwv861-lilypond-large,png,center}
@divEnd

@ifclear web_version
  @c no anchor links, just text

LilyPond her türlü notasyon görevi için güçlü ve esnek bir araçtır,
örneğin: klasik müzik (J.S. Bach'ın yukarıdaki örneğinde gösterildiği
gibi), karmaşık notasyon, eski müzik, modern müzik, tablatura, vokal
müzik, nota kağıtları (lead sheets), eğitim materyalleri, büyük orkestral
projeler, kişiselleştirilmiş çıktı ve hatta Schenker grafikleri.

@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c anchor links, link to individual examples by their <a> tag
  @c Translators should use the localized anchor name
  @c (e.g. examples.html#Musica-Antica)
  @c to be found in out-www/web/examples.LL.html

LilyPond her türlü notasyon görevi için güçlü ve esnek bir araçtır,
örneğin:
@uref{examples.html#Classical-Music, klasik müzik}
(J.S. Bach'ın yukarıdaki örneğinde gösterildiği gibi),
@uref{examples.html#Complex-Notation, karmaşık notasyon},
@uref{examples.html#Early-Music, eski müzik},
@uref{examples.html#Modern-Music, modern müzik},
@uref{examples.html#Tablature, tablatura},
@uref{examples.html#Vocal-Music, vokal müzik},
@uref{examples.html#Lead-Sheets, nota kağıtları(lead sheets)},
@uref{examples.html#Educational-Applications, eğitim materyalleri},
@uref{examples.html#Large-Projects, büyük orkestral projeler},
@uref{examples.html#Customized-Output, kişiselleştirilmiş çıktı},
ve hatta
@uref{examples.html#Schenker-Graphs, Schenker grafikleri}.

@end ifset

@ref{Examples} galerimizi gezin ve ilham alın!

@divEnd

@divClass{column-center-middle-color2}
@subheading News

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include en/web/news-headlines.itexi

@ref{News, Daha fazla haber...}

@divEnd

@divEnd


@ifclear web_version
  @c do nothing
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c make the side bar:
@divId{homepage-sidebar}
@subheading Stabil Sürüm

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@ref{Download, İndir @versionStable}

@ref{Manuals, Kılavuz @versionStable}

@subheading Stabil Olmayan Sürüm

@ref{Development, İndir @versionDevel}

@ref{Development, Kılavuz @versionDevel}

@subheading Pondings
@divId{pondingsText}

@divEnd

@divEnd
@end ifset


@html

<script language="JavaScript" type="text/javascript">
  function loadXMLDoc(dname)
    {
      if (window.XMLHttpRequest)
        {
          xhttp=new XMLHttpRequest();
        }
      else
        {
          xhttp=new ActiveXObject("Microsoft.XMLHTTP");
        }
      xhttp.open("GET",dname,false);
      xhttp.send();
      return xhttp.responseXML;
    }

  var xmlDoc = loadXMLDoc("tweets.xml");
  var tweets = xmlDoc.getElementsByTagName("tweet");
  var index = Math.floor(Math.random() * tweets.length);
  var tweet = tweets[index];
  var text = tweet.childNodes[0];
  document.getElementById("pondingsText").innerHTML = text.nodeValue;
</script>

@end html


@ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::     Nota kağıdı oluşturmaya buradan başlayın.
* Download::         LilyPond'u edinin.
* Manuals::          İnce kılavuzu okuyun (RTFM).
* Community::        Diğer kullanıcılarla iletişim kurun.
@end menu

@end ifnottex

@contents

@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the 'lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond`
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@end ignore

@c FIXME: this still doesn't solve the broken links in pdf and big
@c        html; we'll need a bunch of @iftext and stuff in here. -gp
@c ****************** SPECIAL MACROS FOR WEB MANUAL ************
@macro docLinks{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}
@subheading Read it

@docLinksBare{\name\,\base\,\refLink\,\split\,\big\,\pdf\}

@end macro


@macro docLinkSplit{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (bölünmüş HTML),\base\/index.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkBig{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (büyük HTML),\base\-big-page.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkPdf{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\base\.pdf,\base\.pdf,\webLink\}
@end macro


@macro docLinksBare{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}

@divClass{keep-bullets}
@itemize

@item @docLinkSplit{\name\,\base\,\split\} @minus{}
  kılavuz birçok HTML sayfası arasında bölünmüştür.
  @*@ @ @emph{(her sayfa için küçük bir indirme)}

@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} @minus{}
  kılavuzu büyük ve tek bir HTML sayfası olarak okuyun.
  @*@ @ @docDownload{(tek büyük indirme, \base\-big-page.html, )}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} @minus{}
  PDF dosyası olarak indirin.
  @*@ @ @docDownload{(tek büyük indirme, \base\.pdf, )}

@end itemize

@divEnd

@end macro


@c don't add any extra spaces in this macro -gp
@macro ifWebLinks{webLink,normalLink}
@ifclear web_version
  \normalLink\:
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  \webLink\:
@end ifset
@end macro


@ifhtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}

@divClass{heading-center}
@divClass{contactBox}
Burada bahsedilmesi gereken başka bir konu \topic\ fakettiyseniz
lütfen bug-lilypond posta listesine mesaj atarak bize bildirin.
Henüz üye değilseniz üye olmak için:
@uref{https://lists.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-lilypond,info page}.

@divEnd
@divEnd

@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}
@cartouche
Burada bahsedilmesi gereken başka bir konu \topic\ farkettiyseniz
lütfen yazılı olan talimatları takip ederek bize bildirin:
@ref{Bug reports}.

@end cartouche

@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@include tr/web/introduction.itexi
@include en/web/download.itexi
@include en/web/manuals.itexi
@include en/web/community.itexi


@bye
