\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; documentlanguage: de -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: b36beddf06e2a19272064356f5f75a49d3946f7d

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  For details, see the Contributors'
    Guide, node Updating translation committishes.
@end ignore

@c Translators: Jonas Hahnfeld, Till Paala, Michael Gerdau

@setfilename web.info
@settitle LilyPond -- Notation für Jedermann
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage de
@afourpaper

@set FDL
@set web
@include de/macros.itexi
@include weblinks.itexi


@c `Web' was born 2003-03-30 with this commit:
@c Initial revision
@c author: Han-Wen Nienhuys
@c commit: d189a2119004c2f75da2020ea2ed36d817582fc5

@c @macro copyrightDeclare
@c Copyright @copyright{} 2003--2022 by the authors.
@c @end macro

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2022 by the authors.

@c next line is necessary for broken pre-4.13 texinfo's
@c install-info, so leave it there until we officially
@c bump the required version.  -gp
Diese Datei dokumentiert den Internetauftritt von LilyPond.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory LilyPond -- das Notensatzsystem
@direntry
* Webseite: (lilypond-web).             Info-Version von lilypond.org.
@end direntry


@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@c This is intentionally blank because we have @settitle above
@top
@end ifnottex

@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle Das Notensatzsystem
@titlefont{Allgemeine Information}
@author Das LilyPond-Entwicklungsteam

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying

Für LilyPond Version @version{}
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html


@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@ifhtml
@node index
@unnumbered LilyPond
@end ifhtml

@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... Notensatz für Jedermann
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
LilyPond ist ein Notensatzsystem. Das erklärte Ziel ist es,
Notendruck in bestmöglicher Qualität zu erstellen.  Mit dem
Programm wird es möglich, die Ästhetik handgestochenen
traditionellen Notensatzes mit computergesetzten Noten zu
erreichen.  LilyPond ist Freie Software und Teil des
@uref{https://gnu.org,GNU-Projekts}.

@divClass{align-right}
Lesen Sie mehr in der @ref{Einleitung}!

@divEnd
@divEnd


@divId{homepage-main}

@divClass{column-center-top}

@subheading Schöner Notensatz

@c This example image is the image from the website version of the essay
@c manual, downloaded to the pictures directory for use on the home page.
@c Large version is generated manually from ly file in pictures directory.
@divId{homepage-example-image-wrapper}
@imageClickable{bwv861-lilypond,png,,bwv861-lilypond-large,png,center}
@divEnd

@ifclear web_version
  @c no anchor links, just text

LilyPond ist ein sehr mächtiges und flexibles Werkzeug, das Notensatz
unterschiedlichster Art handhaben kann: zum Beispiel klassische Musik
(wie in diesem Beispiel von J. S. Bach), komplexe Notation, Alte Musik,
moderne Musik, Tabulatur, Vokalmusik, Popmusik, Unterrichtsmaterialien,
große Orchesterpartituren, individuelle Lösungen und sogar
Schenker-Graphen.

@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c anchor links, link to individual examples by their <a> tag
  @c Translators should use the localized anchor name
  @c (e.g. examples.html#Musica-Antica)
  @c to be found in out-www/web/examples.LL.html

LilyPond ist ein sehr mächtiges und flexibles Werkzeug, das Notensatz
unterschiedlichster Art handhaben kann: zum Beispiel
@uref{examples.html#Klassische-Musik, klassische Musik}
(wie in diesem Beispiel von J. S. Bach),
@uref{examples.html#Komplexe-Notation, komplexe Notation},
@uref{examples.html#Alte-Musik, Alte Musik},
@uref{examples.html#Moderne-Musik, moderne Musik},
@uref{examples.html#Tabulatur, Tabulatur},
@uref{examples.html#Vokalmusik, Vokalmusik},
@uref{examples.html#Popmusik, Popmusik},
@uref{examples.html#Anwendung-in-der-Musikerziehung, Unterrichtsmaterialien},
@uref{examples.html#Grosse-Projekte, große Orchesterpartituren},
@uref{examples.html#Individuelle-Ausgabe, individuelle Lösungen},
und sogar
@uref{examples.html#Schenker-Graphen, Schenker-Graphen}.

@end ifset

Sehen Sie sich unsere @ref{Beispiele} an und lassen sich inspirieren!

@divEnd

@divClass{column-center-middle-color2}
@subheading Neuigkeiten

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include en/web/news-headlines.itexi

@ref{News, Weitere Neuigkeiten...}

@divEnd

@divEnd


@ifclear web_version
  @c do nothing
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c make the side bar:
@divId{homepage-sidebar}
@subheading Stabile Version

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@ref{Download, Download @versionStable}

@ref{Handbücher, Handbücher @versionStable}

@subheading Entwickler Version

@ref{Entwicklung, Download @versionDevel}

@ref{Entwicklung, Handbücher @versionDevel}

@subheading Pondings
@divId{pondingsText}

@divEnd

@divEnd
@end ifset


@html

<script language="JavaScript" type="text/javascript">
  function loadXMLDoc(dname)
    {
      if (window.XMLHttpRequest)
        {
          xhttp=new XMLHttpRequest();
        }
      else
        {
          xhttp=new ActiveXObject("Microsoft.XMLHTTP");
        }
      xhttp.open("GET",dname,false);
      xhttp.send();
      return xhttp.responseXML;
    }

  var xmlDoc = loadXMLDoc("tweets.xml");
  var tweets = xmlDoc.getElementsByTagName("tweet");
  var index = Math.floor(Math.random() * tweets.length);
  var tweet = tweets[index];
  var text = tweet.childNodes[0];
  document.getElementById("pondingsText").innerHTML = text.nodeValue;
</script>

@end html


@ifnottex

@divClass{hide}
@menu
* Einleitung::     Hier beginnen, um Noten zu setzen.
* Download::       LilyPond Herunterladen.
* Handbücher::     Lesen der Handbücher.
* Gemeinschaft::   Kontakt mit anderen Benutzern aufnehmen.
@end menu
@divEnd

@end ifnottex

@contents

@iftex
@allowcodebreaks false
@end iftex

@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the `lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond'
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@end ignore

@c FIXME: this still doesn't solve the broken links in pdf and big
@c        html; we'll need a bunch of @iftext and stuff in here. -gp
@c ****************** SPECIAL MACROS FOR WEB MANUAL ************
@macro docLinks{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}
@subheading Lesen Sie

@docLinksBare{\name\,\base\,\refLink\,\split\,\big\,\pdf\}

@end macro


@macro docLinkSplit{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (geteiltes HTML),\base\/index.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkBig{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (großes HTML),\base\-big-page.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkPdf{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\base\.pdf,\base\.pdf,\webLink\}
@end macro


@macro docLinksBare{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}

@divClass{keep-bullets}
@itemize

@item @docLinkSplit{\name\,\base\,\split\} @minus{}
  das Handbuch wird in viele HTML-Seiten aufgeteilt.
  @*@ @ @emph{(kleiner Download für jede Seite)}

@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} @minus{}
  das Handbuch als eine großen HTML-Seite.
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(großer einmaliger Download, \base\-big-page.html, )}}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} @minus{}
  das Handbuch als PDF-Datei.
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(großer einmaliger Download, \base\.pdf, )}}

@end itemize

@divEnd

@end macro


@c don't add any extra spaces in this macro -gp
@macro ifWebLinks{webLink,normalLink}
@ifclear web_version
  \normalLink\:
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  \webLink\:
@end ifset
@end macro


@ifhtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}

@divClass{heading-center}
@divClass{contactBox}
Sollten Sie hier die Erwähnung von \topic\ vermissen, dann teilen Sie uns
dies bitte mit indem Sie eine Nachricht an die bug-lilypond Mailingliste schicken.
Falls Sie diese Mailingliste noch nicht abonniert haben, können Sie das auf
dieser Seite ändern:
@uref{https://lists.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-lilypond,info page}.

@divEnd
@divEnd

@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}
@cartouche
Sollten Sie hier die Erwähnung von \topic\ vermissen, dann teilen Sie uns
dies bitte mit. Die Anleitung dazu finden Sie unter
@ref{Fehlerberichte}.

@end cartouche

@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@include de/web/introduction.itexi
@include de/web/download.itexi
@include de/web/manuals.itexi
@include de/web/community.itexi


@bye
