\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish:  4f7427e7a314a71bde16559247885544256b8213

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  For details, see the Contributors'
    Guide, node Updating translation committishes.
@end ignore

@c Translators: Pavel Fric

@setfilename web.info
@settitle LilyPond -- Zápis not pro každého
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage cs
@afourpaper

@c `Web' was imported 2009-08-05 with git commit b938d71...
@c @macro copyrightDeclare
@c Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2022 by the authors.
@c @end macro

@set FDL
@set web
@include cs/macros.itexi
@include weblinks.itexi

@afourpaper


@copying
Autorské právo @copyright{} 2009--2022 autoři.

@c next line is necessary for broken pre-4.13 texinfo's
@c install-info, so leave it there until we officially
@c bump the required version.  -gp
Tento soubor dokládá internetový výstup LilyPondu.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory GNU LilyPond --- the music typesetter
@direntry
* Příručka LilyPond k učení se: (lilypond-learning).  Začátek je zde.
* Slovníček: (music-glossary).               Překlad pojmů z angličtiny do dalších řečí.
* Příručka pro zápis not v LilyPondu: (lilypond-notation).                           Příručka pro zápis not v LilyPondu.
* Úryvky LilyPondu: (lilypond-snippets).         Mnoho triků, rad a příkladů.
* Doporučení pro vnitřní části LilyPondu: (lilypond-internals).  Vysvětlení k nastavení.
* Používání programu LilyPond: (lilypond-usage). Instalace a používání programu.
* Internetové stránky k LilyPond: (lilypond-web).    Přehled nových internetových stránek.
* lilypond: (lilypond-usage)spuštění LilyPondu.  Vyvolání programu LilyPond.
* abc2ly: (lilypond-usage)spuštění abc2ly.      Zavedení notace ABC.
* convert-ly: (lilypond-usage)Obnova souborů pomocí convert-ly. Starší verze LilyPondu.
* etf2ly: (lilypond-usage)spuštění etf2ly.      Zavedení souborů Finale.
* lilypond-book: (lilypond-usage)Kniha o LilyPondu. Vložení textu a not.
* midi2ly: (lilypond-usage)spuštění midi2ly.    Zavedení MIDI.
* musicxml2ly: (lilypond-usage)spuštění musicxml2ly.  Zavedení souborů MusicXML.
@end direntry


@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@c This is intentionally blank because we have @settitle above
@top
@end ifnottex

@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle Program pro sazbu not
@titlefont{Všeobecné informace}
@author Družstvo vývojářů LilyPondu

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying

Pro LilyPond ve verzi @version{}
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html


@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@ifhtml
@node index
@unnumbered LilyPond
@end ifhtml

@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... Notová sazba pro každého
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
@subheading Co je to LilyPond?

LilyPond je programem pro sazbu not s otevřeným zdrojovým kódem, který byl vytvořen s cílem zajistit tisk hudebnin v té nejlepší možné jakosti.  Tento program s otevřeným zdrojovým kódem umožňuje dosáhnout krásy ručně rytých tradičních notových sazeb v počítačem vysázených notách.

@divClass{align-right}
Více se dočtete v @ref{Úvod,,úvodu}!

@divEnd
@divEnd

@divClass{separator}
@divEnd


@divId{news}

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include en/web/news-headlines.itexi

@divClass{float-right}
(@ref{News,,,,Starší novinky})
@divEnd

@divEnd

@ifclear web_version
  @c do nothing
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c make the box:
@divId{latestVersion}
@subheading Přímé odkazy

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@subsubheading Stálá verze

@ref{Download, Stažení @versionStable}

@ref{Manuals, Manuals @versionStable}

@subsubheading Vývojářská verze

@ref{Development, Stažení @versionDevel}

@ref{Development, Manuals @versionDevel}

@divEnd
@end ifset


@ifnottex

@divClass{hide}
@menu
* Úvod::     Se sázením not začněte zde.
* Download::       Stažení LilyPondu.
* Příručky::     Četba příruček.
* Společenství::   Zahájit spojení s jinými uživateli.
@end menu
@divEnd

@end ifnottex

@contents

@iftex
@allowcodebreaks false
@end iftex


@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the `lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond'
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@end ignore




@c FIXME: this still doesn't solve the broken links in pdf and big
@c        html; we'll need a bunch of @iftext and stuff in here. -gp
@c ****************** SPECIAL MACROS FOR WEB MANUAL ************

@macro docLinks{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}
@subheading Čtěte

@docLinksBare{\name\,\base\,\refLink\,\split\,\big\,\pdf\}

@end macro

@macro docLinkSplit{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (rozdělené HTML),\base\/index.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkBig{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (velké HTML),\base\-big-page.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkPdf{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\base\.pdf,\base\.pdf,\webLink\}
@end macro


@macro docLinksBare{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}

@divClass{keep-bullets}
@itemize

@item @docLinkSplit{\name\,\base\,\split\} @minus{}
  Příručka je rozdělena do mnoha stránek HTML.
  @*@ @ @emph{(menší stažení pro každou stránku)}

@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} @minus{}
  Příručka na jedné velké stránce HTML.
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(větší jednorázové stažení, \base\-big-page.html, )}}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} @minus{}
  Příručka jako soubor PDF.
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(větší jednorázové stažení, \base\.pdf, )}}

@end itemize

@divEnd

@end macro


@c don't add any extra spaces in this macro -gp
@macro ifWebLinks{webLink,normalLink}
@ifclear web_version
  \normalLink\:
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  \webLink\:
@end ifset
@end macro


@ifhtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}

@divClass{heading-center}
@divClass{contactBox}
If you are aware of any other \topic\ which could be listed here,
please let us know by following the instructions on
@ref{Bug reports}.

@divEnd
@divEnd

@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}
@cartouche
If you are aware of any other \topic\ which could be listed here,
please let us know by following the instructions on
@ref{Bug reports}.

@end cartouche

@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@include cs/web/introduction.itexi
@include en/web/download.itexi
@include cs/web/manuals.itexi
@include cs/web/community.itexi


@bye
