\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename babysit.info
@settitle Babysit Windows Install Wizard

@node Top
@top

@chapter Babysit Windows Install Wizard

If, after installing LilyPond, it doesn't run: don't panic -- don't
complain.  Our Q+A team has devised an easy and well tested solution.
We advise you to reinstall Windows, and this time follow the
instructions of the wizard minutely.  You can't go wrong.  Good luck!

@example
Desktop
  :Netscape(1) :Netscape(2)
Netscape
  :Bookmarks(3) :www.lilypond.org(4)
  :Windows Unstable(5)
  :setup.exe(6)
Netscape download
  Unknown file type
    :Save file(7)
Save as
  :Drop-down(8) :Select Desktop(9)@footnote{
You could save the file where the dialog box suggests, ie,
the almost at random place wherever you happened to save some
previous file, but we're not in the business of saving clicks,
and chances are you can't find it lateron, so we don't do that.}
Save as
  :Save(10)
Save as 
  C:\WINDOWS\Desktop\setup.exe already exist
  Do you want to replace it? :Yes(11)
Desktop
  :setup.exe(12) :setup.exe(13)
GNU LilyPond Setup
  Setup.exe version 2.40 :Next(14)
  :X(15) Install from internet :Next(16)
  Local Package Directory
    :Browse(17) :C:\tmp(18) :Ok(19)@footnote{
You could download everything on the desktop, but that will
clutter it to a degree that your helpdesk will
probably tell you that you need to reinstall windows, so
we don't do that.} :Next(20)
  Select install root directory
    C:/cygwin :Next(21)
  :X Direct internet connection(22) :Next(23)
  Select Download Site
    :http://appel.lilypond.org(24) :Next(25)
  Select Packages to install (all) :Next(26)@footnote{
You can get a lot of @emph{additional free clicks} here,
by deselecting  some packages, but the installation would
be broken if you don't install everything, so we don't do that.}
  :X Create Desktop Icon(27)
  :X Add to Start Menu(28) :Next(29)
  Installation Complete :Ok(30)
Desktop
  :GNU LilyPond(31):GNU LilyPond(32)
@end example


@bye
