\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename lily-wins.info
@settitle LilyPond for Windows.

@node Top
@top

@chapter Lily Wins on Windows


@subsubsection ---FOR-IMMEDIATE-RELEASE---


Until now, installing LilyPond on Windows was
@uref{http://mail.gnu.org/pipermail/help-gnu-music/2001-April/000620.html,
almost} a dull process that could easily be @uref{
ftp://appel.lilypond.org/pub/gnu-windows/cygwin-1.1.7/bin/tar/lily-install-0.7-1.tar.gz,
automated} and scripted.  This meant that you would have more time left
for actual work, and we all know that's not what computers were designed
for.

Well, that kind of scary automating is no longer necessary!
Also, it's no longer needed to @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/wget,
download}
@uref{http://appel.lilypond.org/gnu-windows/tar/lilypond/lilypond-1.3.147-1.tar.gz,tarballs}
or move @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/guile, all sorts of files}
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/gnu-music-discuss@@gnu.org/msg04380.html,
around}.  Sometimes, the @uref{http://www.winzip.com,automagical
breaking while unpacking} process would even install flawlessly, and you
had to
@uref{http://mail.gnu.org/pipermail/gnu-music-discuss/2000-October/000517.html,
break it yourself by flattening} the
@uref{http://www.lilypond.org,LilyPond} tarball.

Our specially formed Windows support task force has, after thoroughly
investigating your particular needs as an individual user, formuled the
revolutionary new concept of one-size-fits-all software, and delivered
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/gnu-music-discuss%40gnu.org/msg03647.html,
way before schedule}.

With the upcoming @uref{
http://mail.gnu.org/pipermail/info-gnu-music/2001-April/000060.html,
LilyPond-1.4} release, we have innovated agressively, by copying and
@uref{ftp://ftp.lilypond.org/pub/LilyPond/gnu-windows/latest/cygwin-installer.patch,
mutilating } @uref{http://sources.redhat.com/cygwin,Cygwin}'s
@uref{
ftp://ftp.franken.de/pub/win32/develop/gnuwin32/cygwin/mirrors/cygnus/snapshots/cygwin-src-20010410.tar.bz2,
Windows installer}.
No
@uref{http://www.lilypond.org/gnu-windows/tar/lilypond/md5.sum,
difficult checksums} or signatures.  Enjoy the the thrills of running
@uref{http://www.lilypond.org/gnu-windows/latest/setup.exe,
untrusted binaries} with adminstrator rights, on your painfully
firewalled intranet.

We proudly present our @emph{Gourmet-click-de-luxe} install: offering at
least @uref{babysit.html, 32 totally unnecessary clicks}, before you can
actually run LilyPond.  This includes a nice and warm welcome click:
@example
GNU LilyPond Setup

   Version x.y
   (C) Red Hat and us

       [N]ext->
@end example
and of course, especially for all people with an exceptionally fine
developed Windows taste, the maybe even more hollow message that tells
us there's nothing to be told, really:
@example
GNU LilyPond Setup

   Installation completed.

       [O]k
@end example
Yes, that's right.  Farewell @uref{http://www.lilypond.org/auto, smooth
nightly upgrades}.  Even a click at the @emph{very end} is required, so
that you actually feel very useful babysitting the whole process.  Try
it.  You will agree that with this new innovative installer we have
truly reached the holy grail of user friendliness.


@bye
