\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename index.info
@settitle LilyPond Windows NT 4-0/95 Distribution

@chapter LilyPond Windows NT 4.0/95 Distribution

This page documents the NT port of LilyPond.  It reflects  the latest
version of lilypond that was ported.

@section Introduction

This page is dedicated to the distribution of precompiled and
preformatted LilyPond binaries for Windows NT 4.0 .  This package is
covered under the GNU General Public License and all of the source is
available on the official
@uref{http://www.cs.ruu.nl/people/hanwen/lilypond/index.html,LilyPond
Homepage}.  A full set of
@uref{http://www.cs.ruu.nl/people/hanwen/lilypond/Documentation/tex/out-www/index.html,documentation}
in various formats is also available.


    LilyPond is a music typesetter.  It produces beautiful sheet music
using a high level description file as input.  LilyPond is part of 
the GNU Project.

@section News

@table @samp
 @item BUG FIXES
  @itemize @bullet
   @item
      @code{os.rename(this.__base + '.' + str(os.getpid()) + '.dvi', outfile)  
        os.error: (2, 'No such file or directory')}
        This problem was reported by many and thoroughly debugged by
	Wolf Lother.  We have abandoned the use of @code{os.getpid()}, which
	for one reason or another resulted in negative numbers on
	windows 95, in favor of the tempfile module.  We have also
        attempted to use only one '.' in naming temporary files.
  @end itemize
@end table

@table @samp
 @item NOTES
  @itemize @bullet  
   @item  We have had preliminary reports that the Windows 95
        installation works on Windows 98.  Many thanks to Christian
        Mondrup. 

   @item  Please use the Add/Remove program control panel entry to
        unistall your current version of Lilypond before you attempt to
	install this one.

   @item  If you are upgrading from a previous version of lilypond you will most
	likely need to flush your font cache.  I generally just toss
	@file{D:\localtexmf\fonts\tfm\public\ehrhardt} and
	@file{D:\localtexmf\fonts\pk\ljfour\public\ehrhardt} in the Recyle
	Bin. Your local font directory may be different, please refer to your
	local installation of @code{TeX}.

   @item  The FAT16, FAT32, and NTFS file system problems have been
	corrected.  I have tested various installations that are known
	to be operational.  
  @end itemize 
@end table
  
The installer was created with
@uref{http://www.gentee.com/,CreateInstall}.  This is a shareware
application that has capabilities close to the high dollar installers
@strong{InstallShield}, @strong{Install Vise}, and @strong{WiseInstaller}.
@strong{CreateInstall} does cost $38 to register which is probably going to
be frowned upon, but I was unable to find a freeware install builder
that was suitable.  The self extracting distribution currently:

@itemize @bullet
 @item  Installs the lilypond distribution on any valid file system.
 @item  Optionally creates a @emph{Lilypond} shortcut group on your start
      menu with the following shortcuts.
  @itemize @bullet
   @item  @strong{lilyshell}
   @item  @strong{uninstall}
  @end itemize
 @item  Allows unistall through the Add/Remove Program interface on the
      control panel.
 @item  The @strong{lilyshell} uses the /E and /K switches to extend the
      environment size and initialize the shell environment.
 @item  It has the look and feel of a real Windows installer
@end itemize

The @strong{lilyshell} shortcut initializes the environment so you can
generate music from a MSDOS prompt with commands like:

@itemize @bullet
    @item ly2dvi
    @item convert-mudela
    @item mudela-book
    @item lilypond
    @item midi2ly
@end itemize

This release has been tested on Windows NT 4.0sp3 and Windows 95 and
found to be operational.  If you have any troubles and or comments
please do not hesitate to drop me a line 
@uref{mailto:daboys@@austin.rr.com,Jeffrey B. Reed}.

@section Bugs

@itemize @bullet

  @item  Using any text that contains '@{@}' for the value of the any
       valid mudela @strong{header} construct will cause @strong{ly2dvi} to
       fail.  A work around for the @strong{latexheaders} construct is to
       create a @strong{TeX} file and set @strong{latexheaders} to "\input
       foo.tex". 
@end itemize

@section Required Packages

LilyPond uses the @code{TeX} package as its rendering engine. @code{TeX}
represents the state-of-the-art in computer typesetting. It is used to
generate documentation, article, and book quality output. It is an
assume tool to have in your toolbox.

LilyPond uses a @code{Python} script named @code{ly2dvi} to render a
professional quality music score. @code{Python} is an interpreted,
interactive, object-oriented programming language.  It is often
compared to @code{Tcl}, @code{Perl}, @code{Scheme} or @code{Java}.

Gsview is used to display and print the music scores created by
LilyPond.

@itemize @bullet
    @item 
        @uref{http://www.snafu.de/~cschenk/miktex/,MiKTeX}. Versions
        1.10b, 1.11, and 1.20b are known to work.
    @item 
        @uref{http://www.python.org,Python}. Version 1.5.1 and
	possibly 1.5 work.
    @item 
        @uref{http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~ghost/gsview/index.html,gsview}. 
	Version 5.10 is known to work.
@end itemize

@section Download

@itemize @bullet
    @item Windows 95
        @uref{lilypond-TOPLEVEL_VERSION-95.exe,lilypond-TOPLEVEL_VERSION-95}
    @item Windows NT 4.0
        @uref{lilypond-TOPLEVEL_VERSION-nt.exe,lilypond-TOPLEVEL_VERSION-nt}
@end itemize

@section Installation

@itemize @bullet
 the distribution.
  @item run downloaded executable.  
  @item  The first installation of LilyPond also requires these
        additional steps:
     @table @samp
       @item LaTeX geometry package
       @itemize @bullet
         @item 
          @uref{ftp://ctan.tug.org/tex-archive/macros/latex/contrib/supported/geometry.zip,download} the zip file to @code{\Temp}.
         @item Extract the zip file into the LaTeX package area of
             @code{MiKTeX}. This will be @strong{@emph{MiKTeX-dir}\tex\latex}
         @item From a Command Prompt change directory into geometry
             directory that was just extracted.
         @item In the geometry directory type @strong{latex geometry.ins}
       @end itemize 
       @item Miscellaneous fonts
       @itemize @bullet
         @item In your favorite editor create a file named
             @code{cmbx14.mf}. Add the following lines:  
             @strong{design_size=14.4; }  
             @strong{input b-cmbx;}
         @item From a Command Prompt copy cmbx14.mf to the public font
             area of MiKTeX:  
             @strong{copy cmbx14.mf @emph{MiKTeX-dir}\fonts\source\public\cm\base}
        @end itemize
	@item NOTE 
	MiKTeX-1.11 localtexmf configurations should use
        @strong{@emph{localtexmf-dir}} in place of @strong{@emph{MiKTeX-dir}}.
      @end table  
 instructions below
@end itemize

@section Running LilyPond

@itemize @bullet
  @item Take a look at @uref{angels.ly,angels.ly}
  @item Save angels.ly to your local disk
  @item Select the @strong{lilyshell} shortcut from the @emph{Lilypond} group  
  @item  From a LilyPond Command Prompt run:  
  @strong{ly2dvi angels.ly}  
  @strong{dvips angels.dvi}  
  @strong{start angels.ps}  
@end itemize

@section LilyPond Resources

@itemize @bullet
  @item 
        @uref{http://www.cs.ruu.nl/people/hanwen/lilypond/index.html,LilyPond Homepage}
  @item 
        @uref{ftp://ftp.cs.uu.nl/pub/GNU/LilyPond/,LilyPond Ftp Site}
  @item 
        @uref{http://jab.org/mail/gnu-music-discuss@@gnu.org/,gnu-music-discuss mail archive}
  @item Please feel free to mail us at @uref{mailto:gnu-music-discuss@@gnu.org,gnu-music-discuss}
@end itemize




@bye
