\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; documentlanguage: fr -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: 04a1f20da162cd0fec86bddbd14f167a695da480

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  For details, see the Contributors'
    Guide, node Updating translation committishes..
@end ignore

@setfilename web.info
@settitle LilyPond -- la notation musicale pour tous
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage fr
@afourpaper

@c `Web' was imported 2009-08-05 with git commit b938d71...
@c @macro copyrightDeclare
@c Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2011 par les auteurs.
@c @end macro

@set FDL
@set web
@include macros.itexi
@include weblinks.itexi


@c don't remove this comment.
@ignore
@omfcreator Graham Percival and Patrick McCarty
@omfdescription General info about the LilyPond music engraving system
@omftype program usage
@omfcategory Applications|Publishing
@omflanguage French
@end ignore

@c Translators: John Mandereau
@c Translators checkers: Jean-Charles Malahieude

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2011 par les auteurs.

@c next line is necessary for broken pre-4.13 texinfo's
@c install-info, so leave it there until we officially
@c bump the required version.  -gp
This file documents the LilyPond website.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end quotation
@end copying


@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory GNU LilyPond -- le typographe de musique
@direntry
* Manuel d'initiation à LilyPond: (lilypond-learning).       Les premiers pas.
* Glossaire musicologique: (music-glossary).                 Pour l'utilisateur non anglophone.
* Manuel de notation: (lilypond-notation).                   Gravure de musique avec LilyPond.
* Morceaux choisis de LilyPond: (lilypond-snippets).         Petits trucs, astuces et exemples.
* Référence des propriétés internes: (lilypond-internals).   Définitions pour les retouches.
* Manuel d'utilisation: (lilypond-usage).                    Installation et exécution des programmes.
* LilyPond Website: (lilypond-web).                          Prévisualisation du site.
* abc2ly: (lilypond-usage) Lancement de abc2ly.              Import de fichier ABC.
* convert-ly: (lilypond-usage) Mise à jour de fichiers.      Pour d'anciens fichiers LilyPond.
* etf2ly: (lilypond-usage) Lancement de etf2ly.              Import de fichier Finale.
* lilypond-book: (lilypond-usage) LilyPond-book.             Association musique-texte.
* midi2ly: (lilypond-usage) Lancement de midi2ly.            Import de fichier MIDI.
* musicxml2ly: (lilypond-usage) Lancement de musicxml2ly.    Import de fichier MusicXML.
@end direntry


@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top LilyPond... la notation musicale pour tous
@translationof Top
@end ifnottex


@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle Le système de notation musicale
@titlefont{Informations générales}
@author Équipe de développement de LilyPond

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying

Pour LilyPond version @version{}
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html

@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... la notation musicale pour tous
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
@subheading Qu'est-ce que LilyPond ?

LilyPond est un logiciel de gravure musicale, destiné à produire
des partitions de qualité optimale.  Ce projet apporte à l'édition
musicale informatisée l'esthétique typographique de la gravure
traditionnelle.  LilyPond est un logiciel libre rattaché au
@uref{http://gnu.org,projet GNU}.

@divClass{align-right}
Plus sur LilyPond dans notre @ref{Introduction} !

@divEnd
@divEnd

@divClass{separator}
@divEnd


@divId{news}

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include web/news-front.itexi

@divClass{float-right}
(@ref{Archives}) @c (@ref{Old news,,,,Actualités passées})
@divEnd

@divEnd


@ifclear web_version
  @c do nothing
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c make the box:
@divId{latestVersion}

@subheading Raccourcis

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@subsubheading Branche stable

@ref{Download, Téléchargemement de @versionStable}

@ref{Manuals, Manuels de @versionStable}

@subsubheading Branche de développement

@ref{Development, Téléchargement de @versionDevel}

@ref{Development, Manuels de @versionDevel}

@divEnd
@end ifset


@ifnottex

@divClass{hide}
@menu
* Introduction::        Comment créer des partitions
* Téléchargement::      Télécharger LilyPond
* Manuels::             Bibliothèque de LilyPond
* Communauté::          Comment contacter d'autres utilisateurs
@end menu
@divEnd

@end ifnottex

@contents

@allowcodebreaks false

@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the `lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond'
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@end ignore

@c FIXME: this still doesn't solve the broken links in pdf and big
@c        html; we'll need a bunch of @iftext and stuff in here. -gp
@c ****************** SPECIAL MACROS FOR WEB MANUAL ************
@macro docLinks{name,base,refLink,split,big,bigsize,pdf,pdfsize}
@subheading Lisez-le

@docLinksBare{\name\,\base\,\refLink\,\split\,\big\,\bigsize\,\pdf\,\pdfsize\}

@end macro


@macro docLinkSplit{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (HTML multipages),\base\/index.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkBig{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (HTML page unique),\base\-big-page.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkPdf{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\base\.fr.pdf,\base\.pdf,\webLink\}
@end macro


@macro docLinksBare{name,base,refLink,split,big,bigsize,pdf,pdfsize}

@divClass{keep-bullets}
@itemize

@item @docLinkSplit{\name\,\base\,\split\} :
  manuel sous forme de plusieurs pages HTML
  @*@ @ @emph{-- chaque page est assez petite.}

@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} :
  manuel sous forme d'une seule grande page
  @*@ @ @emph{-- un seul gros téléchargement, \bigsize\.}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} :
  manuel au format PDF
  @*@ @ @emph{-- un seul gros téléchargement, \pdfsize\.}

@end itemize

@divEnd

@end macro


@c don't add any extra spaces in this macro -gp
@macro ifWebLinks{webLink,normalLink}
@ifclear web_version
  \normalLink\ :
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  \webLink\ :
@end ifset
@end macro


@ifhtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}

@divClass{heading-center}
@divClass{contactBox}
Si vous avez connaissance d'autres \topic\ qui mériteraient de figurer
ici, faites le nous savoir, en suivant les instructions de la rubrique
@ref{Signalement de bogue}.

@divEnd
@divEnd

@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}
@cartouche
Si vous avez connaissance d'autres \topic\ qui mériteraient de figurer
ici, faites le nous savoir, en suivant les instructions de la rubrique
@ref{Signalement de bogue}.

@end cartouche

@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@include web/introduction.itexi
@include web/download.itexi
@include web/manuals.itexi
@include web/community.itexi

@bye
