\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@documentencoding utf-8
@documentlanguage en
@setfilename AUTHORS.info
@settitle AUTHORS - who did what on GNU LilyPond-


@node Top
@top

@unnumbered AUTHORS

This file lists authors of LilyPond, and what they wrote.  This list
is alphabetically ordered by surname. This file lists people that have
contributed over 100 lines of code.


@c Authors are encouraged to maintain their own entry.

@c Sorted by family name.


Core code:

@itemize @bullet
@item @email{erlenda@@gmail.com,Erlend Aasland}
   Color support, tablature improvements, trivial \mark stuff,
al-niente hairpins.
   
@item @email{benkop@@freestart.hu,Pal Benko},
    Ancient notation.
@item @email{jch@@pps.jussieu.fr, Juliusz Chroboczek},
    Type42 code.
@item @email{david.feuer@@gmail.com, David Feuer},
    PS output code refactoring.
@item @email{bernard@@fong-hurley.org.uk, Bernard Hurley},
    X11 color.
@item @email{chris@@fluffhouse.org.uk, Chris Jackson},
    Piano pedals, directed arpeggios.
@item @email{heikki.junes@@hut.fi, Heikki Junes},
    Fine tuning for quarter tones in midi output.
@item @email{reinhold@@kainhofer.com, Reinhold Kainhofer},
    @uref{http://reinhold.kainhofer.com},
    Musicxml2ly development, various features and fixes.
@item @email{m.krause@@tu-harburg.de, Michael Krause},
    Breathing signs.
@item @email{jiba@@tuxfamily.org, Jean-Baptiste Lamy},
    Tablature support.
@item @email{wl@@gnu.org, Werner Lemberg},
    @TeX{} glue code.
@item @email{joeneeman@@gmail.com, Joe Neeman}, 
    Constrained line breaking.
@item @email{hanwen@@xs4all.nl, Han-Wen Nienhuys}, 
    @uref{http://www.xs4all.nl/~hanwen/},
    Main author.

@item @email{janneke@@gnu.org, Jan Nieuwenhuizen}, 
    @uref{http://www.xs4all.nl/~jantien/},
    Main author.
@item @email{reuter_j@@web.de, Jürgen Reuter},
    @uref{http://www.juergen-reuter.de},
    Ancient notation  support (mensural notation,
    Gregorian chant notation), ambitus, clusters.
@item @email{nicolas.sceaux@@free.fr, Nicolas Sceaux},
    Scheme macros, \markup syntax.
@item @email{c_sorensen@@byu.edu, Carl Sorensen},    
    Fret diagrams.    
@item @email{rune@@zedeler.dk, Rune Zedeler},
    Auto-accidental code, zigzag glissandi, rest bugfixes, minimum
    fret, @code{subdivideBeams}.
@end itemize

Font

@itemize @bullet

@item @email{reuter_j@@web.de, Jürgen Reuter},
    @uref{http://www.juergen-reuter.de},
    Ancient notation font
    Exact Type1 font outlines for feta, feta-alphabet.
@item @email{chris@@fluffhouse.org.uk, Chris Jackson},
    Arpeggio arrow
@item @email{rune@@zedeler.dk, Rune Zedeler},
    16th and shorter rests, 
@item @email{hanwen@@xs4all.nl, Han-Wen Nienhuys}, 
    @uref{http://www.xs4all.nl/~hanwen/},
    Main author.
@item @email{janneke@@gnu.org, Jan Nieuwenhuizen}, 
    @uref{http://www.xs4all.nl/~jantien/},
    Main author.
@item @email{tca@@gnu.org, Tom Cato Amundsen},
    Accordion symbols.
@item @email{arno@@arnowaschk.de, Arno Waschk},
    "espressivo" mark.
@end itemize


Documentation and examples

@itemize
@item @email{mats.bengtsson@@s3.kth.se, Mats Bengtsson},
    @uref{http://www.s3.kth.se/~mabe/},
    Example files, documentation
@item @email{heikki.junes@@hut.fi, Heikki Junes},
    Cleanups in docs and example files.
@item @email{john.mandereau@@free.fr, John Mandereau},
    Internationalization.
@item @email{scancm@@biobase.dk, Christian Mondrup},
    Glossary.
@item @email{hanwen@@xs4all.nl, Han-Wen Nienhuys}, 
    @uref{http://www.xs4all.nl/~hanwen/},
    Main author.
@item @email{janneke@@gnu.org, Jan Nieuwenhuizen}, 
    @uref{http://www.xs4all.nl/~jantien/},
    Main author.
@item @email{gpermus@@gmail.com, Graham Percival},
    @uref{http://percival-music.ca},
    Documentation Editor.
@item @email{pinard@@iro.umontreal.ca, François Pinard},
    @uref{http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~pinard/},
    Parts of Documentation/user/glossary*, started
    internationalization stuff.
@item @email{rune@@zedeler.dk, Rune Zedeler},
    Schumann example.
@end itemize

Support (distributions, editor support, lilypond-book)

@itemize
@item @email{foka@@debian.org, Anthony Fok}, 
    Debian package: debian/*.
@item @email{chris@@fluffhouse.org.uk, Chris Jackson},
    Emacs mode indentation.
@item @email{heikki.junes@@hut.fi, Heikki Junes},
    Major Emacs- and Vim-mode updates.
@item @email{svoboda@@cmu.edu, David Svoboda},
    what-beat emacs module.
@end itemize
  

Translations

@itemize
@item @email{bjoern.jacke@@gmx.de, Bjoern Jacke},
    German glossary translations.
@item @email{nj104@@cus.cam.ac.uk, Neil Jerram}, 
    Glossary translations.
@item @email{heikki.junes@@hut.fi, Heikki Junes},
    Finnish translations.
@item @email{tdm@@dds.nl, Tineke de Munnik},
    Dutch website translation.
@item @email{august@@infran.ru, August S. Sigov},
    Russian translation.
@item @email{, David González},
    Spanish glossary translations.
@item @email{ngclaude@@123mail.org, Nicolas Grandclaude},
    French documentation translation.
@item @email{lolyfan@@wanadoo.fr, Jean-Charles Malahieude},
    French translation of messages, website and documentation.
@item @email{john.mandereau@@free.fr, John Mandereau},
    French translation of messages, website and documentation
@item @email{gauvainpocentek@@yahoo.fr, Gauvain Pocentek},
    French website translation.
@item @email{ludovicsardain@@gmail.com, Ludovic Sardain},
    French documentation translation.
@end itemize


@bye
