\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename FAQ.info
@settitle FAQ - GNU LilyPond Frequently Asked Questions

@html
<!--- @@WEB-TITLE@@=Frequently Asked Questions --->
@end html

@node Top
@chapter FAQ - GNU LilyPond Frequently Asked Questions


@menu
* General::			  General questions
* Installation::		  Installation questions
@end menu


@node General
@section General

@subsection I'm stuck, HELP!

Please read the
@uref{http://lilypond.org/wiki?LilyPondFaqs, full online
FAQs}.  Also, please look in the searchable mailinglist archives:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/lilypond-user@@gnu.org,lilypond-user}
@item
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/bug-lilypond@@gnu.org,bug-lilypond}
@item
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/lilypond-devel@@gnu.org,lilypond-devel}
@item
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/gnu-music-discuss@@gnu.org,gnu-music-discuss}
(this is the archive of the `old' mailing list.) 
@end itemize

Or try the various @uref{http://lilypond.org/search, searching facilities}.

If you are still at loss, send your questions to the @strong{mailing
list}, and not to authors directly.

@node Installation
@section Installation

@subsection Where is guile, libguileX, guile-config?

Red Hat users need to install guile-1.4 and guile-devel-1.4, Debian
users need to get guile1.4, libguile9 and libguile9-dev.

If you're building from source, you need guile 1.4 or newer.  Verify
that the correct guile, guile-config, and libguile* in your PATH and
LD_LIBRARY_PATH (or @file{/etc/ld.so.conf}).

@subsection I upgraded by applying a patch, and now my configure/build breaks.

Patches don't include automatically generated files, i.e. 
@file{configure} and files generated by @file{configure}.  Regenerate them 
yourself:
@quotation
@example 

    ./autogen.sh
    ./configure
 
@end example 
@end quotation 

@subsection I downloaded the windows32 port, and it doesn't match the website!

The website is usually made from the latest snapshots.  Binary releases,
in particular the windows32 binaries, are only made every once in a while.
They may lag several versions behind the latest version.

@subsection Beams, slurs and crescendi are not displayed at all!

XDvi uses GhostScript for displaying PostScript, check that you have
GhostScript installed.  If you use a different DVI viewer (eg, on
Windows), check if it will display embedded PostScript.  Don't worry,
the symbols should appear on the printout.

@subsection I upgraded, and now my symbols are all messed up

We obviously mucked with the fonts in the upgrade.  Remove all
previous fonts, including any .pk and .tfm fonts in
@file{/var/lib/texmf}, @file{/var/spool/texmf}, @file{/var/tmp/texmf}
or @file{/tmp}.  A script automating this has been included, see
@file{buildscripts/clean-fonts.sh}.

@bye
