\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename README.info
@settitle This is the toplevel README to LilyPond
@node Top, , , 
@top

@chapter This is the toplevel README to LilyPond


LilyPond is a music typesetter.  It produces beautiful sheet music
using a high level description file as input.  LilyPond is part of 
the GNU Project.

@section Versioning

LilyPond uses a versioning scheme similar to the Linux kernel.  In a
version "x.y.z", an even second number 'y' denotes a stable version.
For development versions 'y' is odd.  So, in theory, version 1.2 is stable,
which means that there are no glaring errors in it. In practice 1.2.x is also
unmaintained.

1.3.x is in healthy development: lots of problems turn up, but they're
fixed quickly. Therefore we recommend you try 1.2.x, if you have any
problem with it, upgrade to the latest 1.3.x release.

@section Requirements

For the compilation and running of LilyPond you need some additional
packages.  Please refer to the installation instructions.

NOTE: If you downloaded a binary (.rpm or a W95/NT .zip file),
you don't have to compile LilyPond.

@section Installation

For your convenience, a formatted copy of the INSTALL instructions are
in the toplevel directory, as INSTALL.txt

@section Documentation

The real documentation is the directory Documentation/

If you want to read the documentation online, these are options:
@itemize @bullet

@item  use HTML. Refer to INSTALL.txt for information
on how to make the HTML documentation.

@item  use HTML. Point your browser to
@uref{http://www.cs.uu.nl/~hanwen/lilypond/index.html}.
@item use @file{.dvi},  for the tutorial and reference manual. Do

@example 
  make -C Documentation/user/ dvi 
@end example 

You need a working LilyPond binary to create the DVI and HTML sources.

@item  use ASCII. Do
using @example 
	make doc
@end example 

@end itemize


@section Comments

LilyPond is a long way from finished and polished.  We do appreciate
criticism, comments, bugreports, patches, etc., but please,
@example 

	   Please send your e-mail to one of the MAILING LISTS
 
@end example 

and @emph{not} to us personally. We have the following mailing lists:

@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/info-gnu-music,info-gnu-music@@gnu.org}
is a low-volume list for information on the GNU Music project.
    This list is moderated; ask 
    @email{drl@@gnu.org, David R. Linn} or
    @email{hanwen@@cs.uu.nl, Han-Wen} to send announcements for this list.
@item @uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/help-gnu-music,help-gnu-music@@gnu.org}
    For help with using LilyPond.
@item @uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-gnu-music,bug-gnu-music@@gnu.org}
If you have bugreports, you should send them to this list.
@end itemize


@section Windows 32

If you have received this file as part of a DOS/Window32 distribution
(@file{LilyPond-*.zip}), it is advisable to also download the
source package, since it might contain more documentation
@uref{ftp://ftp.cs.uu.nl/pub/GNU/LilyPond/}

If you decide to build LilyPond from source, please read the INSTALL.txt
document first, especially the Windows NT/95 section.

@section Caveats

If you have installed a previous version, be sure to remove old font
files, eg.,
@example 
rm `find /var/lib/texmf/fonts -name 'feta*'` 
@end example 

a script to do this for you is in @file{buildscripts/clean-fonts.sh}

@section Bugs

Send bug reports to @email{bug-gnu-music@@gnu.org}.  For help and
questions use @email{help-gnu-music@@gnu.org} and
@email{gnu-music-discuss@@gnu.org}.  Please consult the FAQ and
installation instructions before mailing your problems.



@bye
