\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; documentlanguage: nl -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: 12c6693055728e69dce5c4e5a4a2b5f71180a5e2

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  For details, see the Contributors'
    Guide, node Updating translation committishes..
@end ignore

@c Translation status: post-GDP

@c Translator: Jan Nieuwenhuizen
@c Translation checker: Tineke de Munnik
@c Translation checker committish: fd33752

@setfilename web.info
@settitle LilyPond -- Muzieknotatie voor iedereen
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage nl
@afourpaper

@set FDL
@set web
@include nl/macros.itexi
@include weblinks.itexi


@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2022 by the authors.

@c next line is necessary for broken pre-4.13 texinfo's
@c install-info, so leave it there until we officially
@c bump the required version.  -gp
This file documents the LilyPond website.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory GNU LilyPond --- the music typesetter
@direntry
* LilyPond Learning Manual: (lilypond-learning).  Start here.
* Music Glossary: (music-glossary).               For non-English users.
* LilyPond: (lilypond-notation).                           LilyPond Notation Reference.
* LilyPond Snippets: (lilypond-snippets).         Short tricks, tips, and examples.
* LilyPond Internals Reference: (lilypond-internals).  Definitions for tweaking.
* LilyPond Application Usage: (lilypond-usage). Installing and running applications.
* LilyPond Website: (lilypond-web).    Preview of new website.
* lilypond: (lilypond-usage)Running LilyPond.      Invoking the LilyPond program.
* abc2ly: (lilypond-usage)Invoking abc2ly.      Importing ABC.
* convert-ly: (lilypond-usage)Updating files with convert-ly. Older LilyPond versions.
* etf2ly: (lilypond-usage)Invoking etf2ly.      Importing Finale.
* lilypond-book: (lilypond-usage)LilyPond-book. Integrating text and music.
* midi2ly: (lilypond-usage)Invoking midi2ly.    Importing MIDI.
* musicxml2ly: (lilypond-usage)Invoking musicxml2ly.  Importing MusicXML.
@end direntry

@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@c This is intentionally blank because we have @settitle above
@top
@end ifnottex


@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle De muziekzetter
@titlefont{Algemene informatie}
@author Het LilyPond ontwikkelteam

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying

Voor LilyPond versie @version{}
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html


@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@ifhtml
@node index
@unnumbered LilyPond
@end ifhtml

@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... muzieknotatie voor iedereen
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
@subheading Wat is LilyPond?

LilyPond is een muzieknotatieprogramma en beoogt het produceren van
bladmuziek van de hoogst mogelijke kwaliteit.  Het integreert de
esthetiek van traditioneel gegraveerde bladmuziek in computer printouts.
LilyPond is vrije software en is onderdeel van het
@uref{http://gnu.org,GNU Project}.


@divClass{align-right}
Lees meer in onze @ref{Inleiding}!

@divEnd
@divEnd

@divClass{separator}
@divEnd


@divId{news}

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include en/web/news-headlines.itexi

@divClass{float-right}
(@ref{News}) @c (@ref{News,,,,Oud nieuws})
@divEnd

@divEnd

@ifclear web_version
  @c do nothing
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c make the box:
@divId{wildCardBox}
@subheading Twitter nieuws
@divId{wildCardText}

@divEnd
@divEnd
@end ifset

@html

<script language="JavaScript" type="text/javascript">
  function loadXMLDoc(dname)
    {
      if (window.XMLHttpRequest)
        {
          xhttp=new XMLHttpRequest();
        }
      else
        {
          xhttp=new ActiveXObject("Microsoft.XMLHTTP");
        }
      xhttp.open("GET",dname,false);
      xhttp.send();
      return xhttp.responseXML;
    }

  var xmlDoc = loadXMLDoc("tweets.xml");
  var tweets = xmlDoc.getElementsByTagName("tweet");
  var index = Math.floor(Math.random() * tweets.length);
  var tweet = tweets[index];
  var text = tweet.childNodes[0];
  document.getElementById("wildCardText").innerHTML = text.nodeValue;
</script>

@end html

@ifset web_version
  @c make the box:
@divId{latestVersion}
@subheading Snelle verwijzingen

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@subsubheading Stabiel

@ref{Download, Download @versionStable}

@ref{Handleidingen, Handleidingen @versionStable}

@subsubheading Ontwikkeling

@c community.itexi met `Ontwikkeling' is nog niet vertaald
@ref{Development, Download @versionDevel}

@ref{Development, Handleidingen @versionDevel}

@divEnd
@end ifset


@ifnottex

@divClass{hide}
@menu
* Inleiding::     Start here to creating sheet music.
* Download::         Get LilyPond.
* Handleidingen::          Read The Fine Manuals (RTFM).
* Community::        Contact other users.
@end menu
@divEnd

@end ifnottex

@contents

@iftex
@allowcodebreaks false
@end iftex

@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the `lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond'
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@end ignore

@c FIXME: this still doesn't solve the broken links in pdf and big
@c        html; we'll need a bunch of @iftext and stuff in here. -gp
@c ****************** SPECIAL MACROS FOR WEB MANUAL ************
@macro docLinks{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}
@subheading Read it

@docLinksBare{\name\,\base\,\refLink\,\split\,\big\,\pdf\}

@end macro


@macro docLinkSplit{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (split HTML),\base\/index.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkBig{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (big HTML),\base\-big-page.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkPdf{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\base\.pdf,\base\.pdf,\webLink\}
@end macro


@macro docLinksBare{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}

@divClass{keep-bullets}
@itemize

@item @docLinkSplit{\name\,\base\,\split\} @minus{}
  the manual is split between many HTML pages.
  @*@ @ @emph{(small download for each page)}

@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} @minus{}
  read this manual as one huge HTML page.
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(large single download, \base\-big-page.html, )}}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} @minus{}
  download as a PDF file.
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(large single download, \base\.pdf, )}}

@end itemize

@divEnd

@end macro


@c don't add any extra spaces in this macro -gp
@macro ifWebLinks{webLink,normalLink}
@ifclear web_version
  \normalLink\:
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  \webLink\:
@end ifset
@end macro


@ifhtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}

@divClass{heading-center}
@divClass{contactBox}
If you are aware of any other \topic\ which could be listed here,
please let us know by following the instructions on
@ref{Bug reports}.

@divEnd
@divEnd

@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}
@cartouche
If you are aware of any other \topic\ which could be listed here,
please let us know by following the instructions on
@ref{Bug reports}.

@end cartouche

@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@include nl/web/introduction.itexi
@include en/web/download.itexi
@include nl/web/manuals.itexi
@include en/web/community.itexi


@bye

