\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; documentlanguage: zh -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: a8841c7b9212700f2ebac56e0713afa78a8f0ca0

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  For details, see the Contributors'
    Guide, node Updating translation committishes..
@end ignore

@setfilename web.info
@settitle LilyPond -- 人人的乐谱软件
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage zh
@afourpaper

@c `Web' was imported 2009-08-05 with git commit b938d71...
@c @macro copyrightDeclare
@c Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2022 by the authors.
@c @end macro

@c Translators: Ben Luo, Anthony Fok

@set FDL
@set web
@include zh/macros.itexi
@include weblinks.itexi


@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2009--2022 by the authors.

@c next line is necessary for broken pre-4.13 texinfo's
@c install-info, so leave it there until we officially
@c bump the required version.  -gp
LilyPond 网站由本文件归档。

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end quotation
@end copying


@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory GNU LilyPond --- the music typesetter
@direntry
* LilyPond 学习手册: (lilypond-learning).  从这开始。
* Music 术语表: (music-glossary).               为非英语用户。
* LilyPond: (lilypond-notation).                           LilyPond 记谱法参考手册。
* LilyPond 片断: (lilypond-snippets).         短的特征，窍门和例子。
* LilyPond 内部机制参考手册: (lilypond-internals).  定义各调节项。
* LilyPond 应用程序的用法: (lilypond-usage). 安装和运行应用程序。
* LilyPond 网站: (lilypond-web).    新网站预览。
* lilypond: (lilypond-usage)运行 lilypond.       调用 LilyPond 程序。
* abc2ly: (lilypond-usage)调用 abc2ly.      导入 ABC。
* convert-ly: (lilypond-usage)用convert-ly更新文件。 旧的 LilyPond 版本。
* etf2ly: (lilypond-usage)调用 etf2ly.      导入 Finale。
* lilypond-book: (lilypond-usage)lilypond-book. 文本和音乐合并。
* midi2ly: (lilypond-usage)调用 midi2ly.    导入 MIDI。
* musicxml2ly: (lilypond-usage)调用 musicxml2ly.  导入 MusicXML。
@end direntry


@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@c This is intentionally blank because we have @settitle above
@top
@end ifnottex


@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle 音乐制谱系统
@titlefont{通用信息}
@author LilyPond 开发团队

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying

LilyPond 版本号 @version{}
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html


@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@ifhtml
@node index
@unnumbered LilyPond
@end ifhtml

@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... 人人的乐谱软件
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
@subheading LilyPond 是什么？

LilyPond (荷花池) 是一个音乐雕版软件，致力产生最高质量的乐谱。它把传统音乐雕版印刷的美学，呈现在计算机打印的乐谱上。LilyPond 是自由软件，也是 @uref{http://gnu.org,GNU Project} 的一部分。


@divClass{align-right}
更多内容，请见@ref{简介}！

@divEnd
@divEnd

@divClass{separator}
@divEnd


@divId{news}

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include en/web/news-headlines.itexi

@divClass{float-right}
(@ref{News})
@divEnd

@divEnd

@ifclear web_version
  @c do nothing
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  @c make the box:
@divId{wildCardBox}
@subheading Pondings
@divId{wildCardText}

@divEnd
@divEnd
@end ifset

@html

<script language="JavaScript" type="text/javascript">
  function loadXMLDoc(dname)
    {
      if (window.XMLHttpRequest)
        {
          xhttp=new XMLHttpRequest();
        }
      else
        {
          xhttp=new ActiveXObject("Microsoft.XMLHTTP");
        }
      xhttp.open("GET",dname,false);
      xhttp.send();
      return xhttp.responseXML;
    }

  var xmlDoc = loadXMLDoc("tweets.xml");
  var tweets = xmlDoc.getElementsByTagName("tweet");
  var index = Math.floor(Math.random() * tweets.length);
  var tweet = tweets[index];
  var text = tweet.childNodes[0];
  document.getElementById("wildCardText").innerHTML = text.nodeValue;
</script>

@end html

@ifset web_version
  @c make the box:
@divId{latestVersion}
@subheading 快捷链接

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@subsubheading 稳定版

@ref{Download, Download @versionStable}

@ref{Manuals, Manuals @versionStable}

@subsubheading 开发版

@ref{Development, Download @versionDevel}

@ref{Development, Manuals @versionDevel}

@divEnd
@end ifset


@ifnottex

@divClass{hide}
@menu
* 简介::        从这开始创建乐谱。
* Download::        获得 LilyPond。
* 手册::        阅读完整的手册（RTFM）。
* 社区::        和其他用户联络。
@end menu
@divEnd

@end ifnottex

@contents

@iftex
@allowcodebreaks false
@end iftex

@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the `lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond'
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@end ignore

@c FIXME: this still doesn't solve the broken links in pdf and big
@c        html; we'll need a bunch of @iftext and stuff in here. -gp
@c ****************** SPECIAL MACROS FOR WEB MANUAL ************
@macro docLinks{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}
@subheading 开始阅读

@docLinksBare{\name\,\base\,\refLink\,\split\,\big\,\pdf\}

@end macro


@macro docLinkSplit{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (分开的 HTML),\base\/index.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkBig{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\name\ (大的 HTML),\base\-big-page.html,\webLink\}
@end macro

@macro docLinkPdf{name,base,webLink}
  @docLink{\base\.pdf,\base\.pdf,\webLink\}
@end macro


@macro docLinksBare{name,base,refLink,split,big,pdf}

@divClass{keep-bullets}
@itemize

@item @docLinkSplit{\name\,\base\,\split\} @minus{}
  本手册分解了许多 HTML 页面。
  @*@ @ @emph{(每个页面有一小的下载)}

@item @docLinkBig{\name\,\base\,\big\} @minus{}
  以单一大 HTML 页面的方式阅读本手册。
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(大的单一下载, \base\-big-page.html, )}}

@item @docLinkPdf{\name\,\base\,\pdf\} @minus{}
  以 PDF 文件的方式下载。
  @*@ @ @emph{@docSize{(大的单一下载, \base\.pdf, )}}

@end itemize

@divEnd

@end macro


@c don't add any extra spaces in this macro -gp
@macro ifWebLinks{webLink,normalLink}
@ifclear web_version
  \normalLink\:
@end ifclear
@ifset web_version
  \webLink\:
@end ifset
@end macro


@ifhtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}

@divClass{heading-center}
@divClass{contactBox}
如果您知道有其他可以在这里列出的\topic\，请按照@ref{错误报告}页面上的指示，让我们知道。谢谢！

@divEnd
@divEnd

@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro contactUsAbout{topic}
@cartouche
如果您知道有其他可以在这里列出的\topic\，
请按照@ref{错误报告}页面上的指示，让我们知道。谢谢！

@end cartouche

@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@include zh/web/introduction.itexi
@include en/web/download.itexi
@include zh/web/manuals.itexi
@include zh/web/community.itexi


@bye
