\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: FILL-IN-HEAD-COMMITTISH

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  See TRANSLATION for details.
@end ignore

@setfilename lilypond.info
@settitle GNU LilyPond New Website
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en

@set web
@include macros.itexi

@afourpaper

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GNU LilyPond --- Web site
@chapheading The music typesetter
@end ifnottex


@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle The music typesetter
@titlefont{New Website}
@author The LilyPond development team

Copyright @copyright{} 1999--2009 by the authors

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation

@vskip 20pt

For LilyPond version 
@end titlepage

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 1999--2009 by the authors

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... music notation for everyone
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3.png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
@subheading What is LilyPond?

LilyPond is an open-source music engraving program, devoted to
producing the highest-quality sheet music possible.  We bring the
aesthetics of traditionally engraved music to computer printouts.

@divClass{align-right}
Read more in our @ref{Introduction}!
@divEnd
@divEnd


@divId{news}
FIXME: process news items like the old web site:
select first 4 items to insert here, and generate
RSS.

@c @include news-front.itexi

@divClass{float-right}
(@ref{Old news})
@divEnd

@divEnd


@divId{latestVersion}
@subheading Quick links

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@subsubheading Stable

@ref{Download, Download 2.12.3}

@ref{Manuals, Manuals 2.12.3}

@subsubheading Unstable

@ref{Development, Download 2.13.2}

@ref{Development, Manuals 2.13.2}

@divEnd


@divClass{hide}
@menu
* Introduction::     Start here to creating sheet music.
* Download::         Get LilyPond.
* Manuals::          Read The Fine Manuals (RTFM).
* Community::        Contact other users.
@end menu
@divEnd

@contents


@include general/introduction.itexi
@include general/download.itexi
@include general/manuals.itexi
@include general/community.itexi

@bye
