=head1 NAME

The Homepage of LilyPond -- the GNU Project music typesetter

=head1 DESCRIPTION

LilyPond is the GNU Project music typesetter.  It generates visual or
auditive output from a music definition file: it can typeset formatted
sheet music to a TeX file and play (mechanical) performances to a MIDI
file.

This is not a Fanmail/Hype page. These pages were entirely created from
the LilyPond package-sources. 

Note: These pages are created from the latest B<development snapshots>
of LilyPond.  You can look at the bottom if you want to know which
version this was.

=head2 Mirrors

=over 4

=item http://sca.uwaterloo.ca/~praetzel/lilypond/

Eric Praetzel was kind enough to provide a mirror of both the website
and the ftp site.  

=back

=head2 Examples

<a href=examples_output.html
>
short examples of what LilyPond can do: MIDI, PS, .gif and input.
</a
>

<a href=mutopiaexamples_output.html 
>
examples of what LilyPond can do
with real music: MIDI, PS, .gif and input 
</a
>


=head2 NEWS! 

This is what the latest version brings:

top_of_NEWS

=head2 Documentation: Introduction

=over 4

=item *
<a href=ANNOUNCE-0.1.txt
>
The announce of 0.1
</a
>


=item *
<a href=DEDICATION.txt
>
DEDICATION
</a
>

=item *
<a href=faq.html
>
FAQs
</a
>

=item *
<a href=INSTALL.html
>
The installation instructions.
</a
>

=back

=head2 Why: Background Information 

=over 4

=item *
<a href=MANIFESTO.html
>
Design criteria
</a
>

=item *
<a href=gnu-music.html
>
The GNU Music project
</a
>

=item *
<a href=mutopia.html
>
Mutopia -- Music To the People
</a
>

=item *
<a href=lelieblond.gif
>
The lilypond logo (Big, format: .gif)
</a
>

=item *
<a href=lelie_logo.gif
>
The lilypond logo (medium size, format: .gif)
</a
>


=back

=head2 Documentation: manpages, manuals


=over 4

=item *
<a href=tex_manuals.html
>
PS documents about LilyPond
</a
>


=item *
<a href=mi2mu.html
>
manual page for mi2mu, the MIDI convertor.
</a
>

=item *
<a href=lilypond.html
>
The manual page
</a
>

=item *
<a href=convert-mudela.html
>
The mudela convertor: convert-mudela
</a
>

=item *
<a href=mudela-book.html
>
mudela in TeX: mudela-book
</a
>

=back

=head2 The program

=over 5

=item *
<a href=TODO.txt
>
The TODO list.
</a
>

=item *
<a href=NEWS.txt
>
The Change log
</a
>

=item *
<a href=internals.html
>
internal structures.
</a
>

=item *
<a href=CodingStyle.html
>
The coding standards of the lilypond project.
</a
>

=item *
<a href=docxx/index.html
>
The DOC++ documentation of the C++ sources.
</a
>

=item *
<a href=AUTHORS.html
>
AUTHORS
</a
>

=back

=head2 Links

=over 5

=item *
<a href=literature.html
>
Papers, books and online-resources on music typesetting
</a
>

=item *
<a href=other-packages.html
>
Other packages for printing music.
</a
>

=item *
<a href=links.html
>
B<download> LilyPond and other interesting links
</a
>


=item *
<a href=sconstat/stats.html
>
Stats on this page.
</a
>

=back


