\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename index.info
@settitle Index to LilyPond documentation

@html
<!--- @@WEB-TITLE@@=Documentation --->
@end html

@node Top, , , (dir)
@top

@html
<a name="everyone">
@end html


@unnumberedsubsec General information


@itemize @bullet 
@item Lily is @uref{DEDICATION.html,dedicated to our friends.}  
@item
It is released under the @uref{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html, GNU GPL}.
@end itemize

@html
<a name="newbies">
@end html


@c Flat lists of links are not so handy
@c the links themselves (basename of filename) do not make for
@c intuitive clicking.


@unnumberedsubsec Information for new users

@c Hmm, this looks a bit better; maybe for users/developers too?

@quotation

@unnumberedsubsubsec Installation

@itemize @bullet
@item The @uref{../topdocs/out-www/README.html, README} contains general information.
@item   How to @uref{../topdocs/out-www/INSTALL.html, install on Unix}
@item How to install @uref{../windows/out-www/installing.html, on
Windows}.  (Or just @uref{http://cygwin.com/setup.exe, Install Lily Now}).
@end itemize

@c also for users...
@unnumberedsubsubsec Support

@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{../../index.html,Front Page}: What is LilyPond?
@item  Subscribe to the
@uref{../topdocs/out-www/README.html#mailing-lists,mailing lists}
@end itemize

@unnumberedsubsubsec Documents

@c direct links into first steps and running lily?
@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{../user/out-www/lilypond/Tutorial.html,Learn} how to use LilyPond.
@end itemize

@end quotation

@html
<a name="users">
@end html

@unnumberedsubsec Information for users


@itemize @bullet
@item The complete @uref{../user/out-www/lilypond/lilypond.html,user
manual}, (also in @uref{../user/out-www/lilypond.ps.gz,PostScript} and
@uref{../user/out-www/lilypond.pdf,PDF}).

@item
The user @uref{../user/out-www/lilypond.html, manual in one big page},
for easy searching, or look it up in the
@uref{../user/out-www/lilypond/Index.html,index}.

@c glossary maybe for new users?
 @item
 A  @uref{../user/out-www/glossary.html,glossary}  of musical
terms, including translations.  (also in
@uref{../user/out-www/glossary.ps.gz,PostScript} and
@uref{../user/out-www/glossary.pdf,PDF}).  Read this if you're not
familiar with English terms for notation.

@item Documentation of
@uref{../user/out-www/lilypond-internals/lilypond-internals.html,internals},
 generated from the source code.  If
you want to fine-tune output, you need the information in this
document.

@item
 @uref{../../input/template/out-www/template.html, Templates}, for
different music styles. Add notes, and done!

@item All of the @uref{../../input/test/out-www/test.html,tips-and-tricks}
 input snippets, with the corresponding
output shown.  Also available in
@uref{../../input/test/out-www/test.ps.gz,PostScript} and
@uref{../../input/test/out-www/test.pdf,PDF} formats.
@end itemize



@html
<a name="developers">
@end html

@unnumberedsubsec Information for developers

@c Han-Wen's site?
@c Jan's site?

@itemize @bullet
@item The @uref{ChangeLog.html, ChangeLog} lists things recently done.
@item The
@uref{../../input/regression/out-www/regression.html,Regression Tests}
are lot of snippets that test all basic features.  Also available in
@uref{../../input/regression/out-www/regression.ps.gz,PostScript} and
@uref{../../input/regression/out-www/regression.pdf,PDF} formats.
@item
@uref{http://www2.iro.umontreal.ca/~pinard/po/registry.cgi?domain=lilypond">Translations,Lilypond
Textual Domain
} in the Translation Project.
@item Compiling for @uref{../windows/out-www/compiling.html,Windows/Cygwin}.
@end itemize



@unnumberedsubsec Literature

@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{../bibliography/out-www/colorado.html,University of
Colorado Engraving music bibliography}. Books referred to at the
@uref{http://www.cc.colorado.edu/Dept/MU/Musicpress/,Big Site of Music
Notation and Engraving} at University of Colorado.
@item References on
@uref{../bibliography/out-www/engraving.html,engraving and music
notation}.
@item Papers on
@uref{../bibliography/out-www/computer-notation.html,music notation
by computer}.
@end itemize


@html
<a name="mailing-lists">
@end html
@unnumberedsec Mailing lists

If you have questions, you can write to our mailing lists:
@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/lilypond-devel,lilypond-devel@@gnu.org}
This list is for discussions concerning the development release of
LilyPond.

Searchable archives are available from
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/lilypond-devel@@gnu.org}.

@item @uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/info-lilypond,info-lilypond@@gnu.org}
is a low-volume list for information on the GNU Music project.
    This list is moderated; ask 
    @email{drl@@gnu.org, David R. Linn} or
    @email{hanwen@@cs.uu.nl, Han-Wen} to send announcements for this list.

Searchable archives are available from
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/info-lilypond@@gnu.org}.

@item @uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/lilypond-user,lilypond-user@@gnu.org}
        For discussing every-day use of LilyPond, in particular the
stable releases.

Searchable archives are available from
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/lilypond-user@@gnu.org}.

@item @uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-lilypond,bug-lilypond@@gnu.org}
If you have bugreports, you should send them to this list.  

Please include in your bugreport the version of LilyPond that you
experience the problem with, a description of your system and sample
input to reproduce the problem. Do not send output files over the
list, they tend to be very big and don't help with describing the
problem.

Searchable archives are available from
@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/bug-lilypond@@gnu.org}.

@end itemize


@unnumberedsubsec Logo
@itemize @bullet
@item Logo in @uref{../pictures/out-www/lelieblond.png, large} size.
@item Logo in @uref{../pictures/out-www/lelie-logo.png, medium} size.
@item Logo in @uref{../pictures/out-www/lelie-icon.png, small} size.
@end itemize


@unnumberedsubsec Background information


@html
<a name="background">
@end html

@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{../topdocs/out-www/AUTHORS.html, Authors} documents who did
what on LilyPond.
@item @uref{../out-www/NEWS.txt,NEWS} summary of changes for 1.4
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/CHANGES-1.4.html, CHANGES-1.4} Change logs
from 1.4 up to 1.5
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/CHANGES-1.3.html, CHANGES-1.3} Change logs from 1.3 up to 1.4 
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/CHANGES-1.2.html, CHANGES-1.2} Change logs from 1.2 up to 1.3 
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/CHANGES-1.1.html, CHANGES-1.1} Change logs from 1.1 up to
1.2 
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/CHANGES-1.0.html, CHANGES-1.0} Change logs from 1.0 up to 1.1 
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/CHANGES-0.1.html, CHANGES-0.1} Change logs from 0.1 up to 1.0 
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/CHANGES-0.0.html, CHANGES-0.0} Change logs from 0.0 up to 0.1
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/NEWS-1.4.html, NEWS-1.4} summary of changes from 1.2 till 1.4

@item @uref{../misc/out-www/NEWS-1.2.html, NEWS-1.2} summary of changes from 1.0 till 1.2

@item @uref{../misc/out-www/ANNOUNCE-1.2.html, ANNOUNCE-1.2} Announcement of 1.2 (includes summary of changes)
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/ANNOUNCE-1.0.html, ANNOUNCE-1.0} Announcement of 1.0 (includes summary of
changes)
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/ANNOUNCE-0.1.html, ANNOUNCE-0.1} Announcement of 0.1 (includes summary of
changes)
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/AIMS.html, AIMS} Why LilyPond?
@item @uref{../misc/out-www/interview.html, interview} Answers to the Brave GNU world standard questions.
@item @uref{../windows/out-www/lily-wins.html, lily-wins} musings on the
Windows installer
@end itemize

These pages were entirely created from a @strong{development snapshot}
of the LilyPond package.  The version of this webpage is printed at the
bottom.


@bye
