=head1 NAME 

Lily Literature -- reading on music engraving/typesetting/etc.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A list of resources on music printing/writing and engraving.  Please
note that don't have access to most material. 

[What I do know, I've commented inside brackets. They are just
my personal comments, not to be taken too seriously]

=head2 Music engraving

Wanske, Helene.  ``Musiknotation --- Von der Syntax des Notenstichs
zum EDV-gesteuerten Notensatz'', Schott-Verlag, Mainz 1988.  ISBN
3-7957-2886-x. 

[I. A very thorough overview of engraving practices of various
craftsmen. It includes detailed specs of characters, dimensions etc.
II. a thorough overview of a (by now antiquated) automated system
called Ikarus; EDV Means e(lektronischen) D(aten)v(erarbeitung),
electronic data processing]

Maxwell Weaner and Walter Boelke, Standard Music Notation Practice,
revised edition by Arnold Broido and Daniel Dorff. Music Publisher's
Association of the United States Inc., 1993.

Ross, Ted. ``Teach yourself the art of music engraving and
processing'' (3rd edition). Hansen House, Miami Beach, FL.

	Hansen House
	1820 West Ave.
	Miami, FL  33139
	(305) 532-5461

[This is about I<engraving> i.e. professional music typesetting, and
includes some good spacing tables MB]

Read, Gardner. ``Modern Rhythmic Notation.'' Indiana University Press, 1978.

Read, Gardner. ``Music Notation'' (2nd edition). Taplinger Publishing,
New York.

[This is as close to the ``standard'' reference work for music notation issues
as one is likely to get. MB]

=head2 Related papers


Byrd, Donald.  ``Music Notation by Computer''.  Diss. Indiana Univ.,
1985.

Byrd, Donaldn.  ``A System for Music Printing by Computer.''
Computers and the Humanities, 8 (1974), 161-72.

Smith, Leland.  ``Editing and Printing Music by Computer.''  Journal
of Music Theory, 17 (1973), 292-309. 

[If I remember correctly, this was concerned more with an input
language than with the typography. SP.]

Gomberg, David A.   ``A Computer-Oriented System for Music Printing.''  Diss.
Washington Univ. 1975.

Hewlett, Walter B. and Eleanor Selfridge-Field.  Directory of Computer
Assisted Research in Musicology.  Menlo Park, CA: Center for Computer
Assisted Research in the Humanities.  

[Annual editions since 1985, many containing surveys of music
typesetting technology. SP]


W.A. Hegazy and J. S. Gourlay. Optimal line breaking in music. In
``Document Manipulation and Typography'', J.C. van Vliet (ed) 1988.

[This generalizes TeX's breaking algorithm to music]

David A.  Gomberg; A Computer-oriented System for Music Printing.
Computers and the Humanities, Vol.11, pp 63-80.

J. Gourlay, ``Spacing a Line of Music,'' Technical Report
OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR35, Department of Computer and Information Science,
The Ohio State University, 1987.

J. Gourlay, A. Parrish, D. Roush, F. Sola, Y. Tien, ``Computer
Formatting of Music,'' Technical Report OSU-CISRC-2/87-TR3,
Department of Computer and Information Science, The Ohio State
University, 1987.

W. Hegazy, ``On the Implementation of the MusiCopy Language
Processor,'' Technical Report OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR34, Department of
Computer and Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

A. Parrish and J. Gourlay, ``Computer Formatting of Musical
Simultaneities,'' Technical Report OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR28, Department
of Computer and Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

D. Roush, ``Music Formatting Guidelines,'' Technical Report
OSU-CISRC-3/88-TR10, Department of Computer and Information Science,
The Ohio State University, 1988.

F. Sola, ``Computer Design of Musical Slurs, Ties and Phrase
Marks,'' Technical Report OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR32, Department of
Computer and Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

F. Sola and D. Roush, ``Design of Musical Beams,'' Technical
Report OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR30, Department of Computer and Information
Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

J. S. Gourlay. A language for music printing. In ``Communications of
the ACM''. Vol. 29(5), 388--401, 1986.

[This paper describes a vapourware music setting system and an input
language to go with it. ]

D. Blostein and L. Haken, The Lime Music Editor: A Diagram Editor
Involving Complex Translations, Software Practice and Experience,
Vol. 24, No. 3, March 1994, pp. 289-306.

[A description of various conversions, decisions and issues relating
to this interactive editor]

L. Haken and D. Blostein, The Tilia Music Representation:
Extensibility, Abstraction, and Notation Contexts for the Lime Music
Editor, Computer Music Journal, Vol. 17, No. 3, 1993, pp. 43-58 

[A description of Lime internals (which resemble older (before
0.0.68pre) LilyPond data structures somewhat)]

L. Haken and D. Blostein, A New Algorithm for Horizontal Spacing of
Printed Music, International Computer Music Conference, Banff,
Sept. 1995, pp. 118-119. 

[This describes an algorithm which uses springs between adjacent
columns. This algorithm is a "subclass" of the LilyPond algorithm.]

D. Blostein and L. Haken, Justification of Printed Music,
Communications of the ACM, VolJ34, No. 3, March 1991, pp. 88-99. 

[This paper provides a shallow overview of the algorithm used in LIME
for spacing individual lines.]

Gary M. Rader, ``Creating Printed Music Automatically''. Computer Vol
29(6), June 1996, pp 61--69.

[Describes a system called MusicEase, and explains that it uses
"constraints" (which go unexplained) to automatically position various
elements.]

Stephen Dowland Page.  ``Computer Tools for Music Information
Retrieval''.  Dissertation  Univ of Oxford, 1988.  

[Don't ask Stephen for a copy. Write to the Bodleian Library, Oxford,
or to the British Library, instead.]

=head2  Further reading

Chlapik, Herbert. ``Die Praxis des Notengraphikers''. Doblinger, 1987.
ISBN 3-9000 035-96-2.

[An clearly written book for the casually interested reader. It shows
some of the conventions and difficulties in printing music]

The University of Colorado Music Engraving page.
http://obenamots.cc.colorado.edu/Musicpress/engraving.html

More on GNU Music: http://dept-info.labri.u-bordeaux.fr/~strandh/Gsharp

Tablature: http://wabakimi.carleton.ca/~phacket2/guitar/tabfaq.html

Donato, Anthony. Preparing Music Manuscript. Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice-Hall, 1963.

Donemus. ``Uitgeven van muziek''. Donemus Amsterdam, 1900

Heussenstamm, George. The Norton Manual of Music Notation. New York:
Norton, 1987.

Karkoshka, Erdhard. Notation in New Music. Trans. Ruth Koenig. New York:
Praeger    Publishers, 1972.  Out of print.

Roelofs, Ren\'e. ``Een Geautomatiseerd Systeem voor het Afdrukken van
Muziek'' afstudeerscriptie Bestuurlijke informatica, no 45327, Erasmus
universiteit Rotterdam, 1991.  (``An automated system for printing
music'' Master's Thesis Managerial Computer Science.)

[This thesis describes a simplistic (monophonic) typesetting system,
and focuses on the breaking algorithm, which is taken from Hegazy & Gourlay]

C. Roemer, The Art of Music Copying. Roerick music co., Sherman Oaks
(CA), 1973.

Rosecrans, Glen. Music Notation Primer. New York: Passantino, 1979.

Stone, Kurt. Music Notation in the Twentieth Century. New York: Norton, 1980.

=head2 other stuff


Peter S. Langston, Unix music tools at Bellcore. 
Software --- Practice and Experience, Vol. 20(S1), S1/47--S1/61, 1990.

[This paper deals with some command-line tools for music editing and
playback. It doesn't mention notation issues, but does come with the
grand idea (not) of using music to monitor complex systems. Imagine your
nuclear plant supervisor to use AC/DC for checking the reactor]

Cindy Grande, NIFF6a Notation Interchange File Format.
Grande Software Inc., 1995.  ftp://blackbox.cartah.washington.edu/pub/

[Specs for NIFF, a comprehensive but binary (yuk) format for notation]

Miguel Filgueiras and Jos\'e Paulo Leal. Representation and
manipulation of music documents in SceX.  Electronic Publishing,
vol. 6 (4), 507--518, 1993.

Eric Foxley, Music --- A language for typesetting music scores. 
Software --- Practice and Experience, Vol. 17(8), 485--502, 1987.

[A paper on a TROFF preprocessor to typeset music. The output shown is
not very sophisticated, and contains some typographical atrocities]

Alexander Brinkman,  PASCAL Programming for Music Research.
The University of Chicago Press, 1990.

Miguel Filgueiras, Implementing a Symbolic Music Processing
System. LIACC, Universidade do Porto, 1996; submitted.

Miguel Filgueiras, Some Music Typesetting Algorithms. LIACC,
Universidade do Porto,  forthcoming.

=head1 AUTHORS

Refs contributed by Han-Wen Nienhuys, Miguel Filgueiras, Mark
Basinski, Dorothea Blostein, Stephen Page, Jan Nieuwenhuizen.

This should really be redone in BibTeX
