\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename links.info
@settitle links - Links to other related websites

@node Top, , Backlinks, (dir)
@top
@menu
* links - Links to other related websites::links - Links to other related websites
@end menu



@node links - Links to other related websites, Description, , Top
@menu
* Description::                   Description
* Www::                           Www
* Ftp::                           Ftp
* News::                          News
* Mailing lists::                 Mailing lists
* mail-yo::                       mail-yo
* Backlinks::                     Backlinks
@end menu
@chapter links - Links to other related websites


@node Description, Www, links - Links to other related websites, links - Links to other related websites
@section Description

This page contains links to organisations and ftp-sites, which may be
of interest to LilyPond users.

@node Www, Ftp, Description, links - Links to other related websites
@section Www

@unnumberedsubsec LilyPond

@table @samp
@item @uref{http://www.cs.uu.nl/people/hanwen/lilypond/}Han-Wen's site.
@item @uref{http://sca.uwaterloo.ca/lilypond/}The canadian mirror
(thanks, Eric!)
@end table


@table @samp
@item @uref{http://www.gnu.org/}
    LilyPond is part of the GNU Project.  The GNU project is the name 
    of Richard Stallman's effort to create a freely available 
    system of software.
@item @uref{http://www.zib.de/Visual/software/doc++/index.html}
    The documentation system for C++ sources, which is used for the
    LilyPond sources.
@item @uref{http://www.iat.unc.edu/technology/music/music.html}
    An enormous collection of music related URLs
@item @uref{http://www.ram.org/ramblings/philosophy/fmp.html}
    Musings on free music, plus hints how to record your own (free) music.
@item @uref{http://www.geocities.com/Vienna/Studio/1714/}
	John Sankey has taken up the task of recording classical
	music, and distributing the results at no cost.
@end table

@node Ftp, News, Www, links - Links to other related websites
@section Ftp

At this moment we have about one development-patchlevel per week.
These development releases will be at

@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{ftp://ftp.cs.uu.nl/pub/GNU/LilyPond/development}

@item @uref{ftp://sca.uwaterloo.ca/pub/lilypond}

@item @uref{ftp://ftp.lilypond.org/pub/lilypond}
@end itemize

Debian releases are located at
@uref{http://cgi.debian.org/www-master/debian.org/Packages/stable/tex/lilypond.html}
and
@uref{ftp://ftp.debian.org/debian/dists/unstable/main/binary-i386/tex/lilypond_*.deb}

Precompiled i386 RedHat RPMS are available from
@uref{http://linux.umbc.edu/software/lilypond/rpms/}.

@node News, Mailing lists, Ftp, links - Links to other related websites
@section News

The following newsgroups all contain material relevant to LilyPond
@itemize @bullet

@item @uref{news://comp.music.research}

@item @uref{news://rec.music.compose}

@item @uref{news://gnu.announce}

@item @uref{news://comp.os.linux.announce}
@end itemize

@node Mailing lists, mail-yo, News, links - Links to other related websites
@section Mailing lists

@node mail-yo, Backlinks, Mailing lists, links - Links to other related websites

    
For programs which are part of the GNU music project, the following
mailing list have been setup:

@table @samp
@item info-gnu-music@@gnu.org
    A moderated list for information on the GNU Music project, to
    subscribe: send mail with subject "subscribe" to
    info-gnu-music-request@@gnu.org.  

    As this list is moderated, normal people should ask to
    @email{drl@@gnu.org, David R. Linn} or
    @email{hanwen@@cs.uu.nl, Han-Wen} to forward announces instead of
    sending it to info-gnu-music@@gnu.org

Since the GNU Music project currently only has LilyPond, this list is
mainly for announcing new versions of LilyPond.

@uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/info-gnu-music@@gnu.org}

@item help-gnu-music@@gnu.org
    For help with programs from the GNU music project. To subscribe: send
    mail with subject "subscribe" to
    @email{help-gnu-music-request@@gnu.org}

	Since the GNU Music project currently only has LilyPond, this list is mainly about using and extending LilyPond.

 @uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/help-gnu-music@@gnu.org}

@item bug-gnu-music@@gnu.org
    If you have bugreports, you should send them to this list. If you want
    to read all bugreports, you should subscribe to this list.  To
    subscribe: send mail with subject "subscribe" to
    @email{bug-gnu-music-request@@gnu.org}
 @uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/bug-gnu-music@@gnu.org}
@item gnu-music-discuss@@gnu.org,
    For discussions concerning the GNU Music project, to subscribe: send
    mail with subject "subscribe" to
    @email{gnu-music-discuss-request@@gnu.org}
    This list is archived at
    @uref{http://www.mail-archive.com/gnu-music-discuss@@gnu.org}
@end table

Announces of new versions will be sent to info-gnu-music and
gnu-music-discuss.


@node Backlinks, Top, mail-yo, links - Links to other related websites
@section Backlinks

@table @samp
@item @uref{http://sca.uwaterloo.ca/Mutopia/}
	Mutopia project (under construction).
@item @uref{http://www.ssc.com/linux/}
    The Number One Free Operating System Kernel: Linux 
@item @uref{ http://sound.condorow.net}
    Dave Philips' Linux sound applications page
@item @uref{http://www4.smart.net/~jcovey/scores.html}
	Jeff Covey's guitar music
@item @uref{http://www.home.fh-karlsruhe.de/~rost0001/web/musik/musik.html}
    Stochastic composing using LilyPond 
@item @uref{http://www.medieval.org/emfaq/scores/software.html}
    More software for (early) music.
@item @uref{http://www.pbm.com/~lindahl/ravenscroft/modern}
    Transcriptions of the music of Thomas Ravenscroft, partly using
    LilyPond
@item @uref{http://www.redhat.com/}
    RedHat Software Inc. develops and markets a GNU/Linux distribution (of
    which we are avid users)
@end table


@bye
