=head1 NAME

links - Links to other related websites

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This page contains links to organisations and ftp-sites, which may be
of interest to LilyPond users.

=head2 WWW

=over 4

=item http://www.gnu.org/

LilyPond is part of the GNU Project started by the Free Software
Foundation to create a system of free software for the world-community

=item http://www.zib.de/Visual/software/doc++/index.html

The documentation system for C++ sources, which is used for the
LilyPond sources.

=item http://www.iat.unc.edu/technology/music/music.html

An enormous collection of music related URLs

=item http://www.ram.org/ramblings/philosophy/fmp.html

Musings on free music, plus hints how to record your own (free) music.

=back

=head2 Ftp 

We will upload major releases to the following sites:

=over 4

=item ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/apps/sound/convert

The GNU/Linux FTP site

=item ftp://ftp.dante.de/tex-archive/support/lilypond

An ftp site which is in CTAN.

=item ftp://ftp.redhat.com/pub/contrib/

The FTP site of RedHat Software.


=back

At this moment we have about one development-patchlevel per week. 
These development releases will also be at

=over 4

=item ftp://pcnov095.win.tue.nl/pub/lilypond/development

=item ftp://sca.uwaterloo.ca/pub/lilypond

=item [your mirror here]

=back

=head2 News

The following newsgroups all contain material relevant to LilyPond

=over 4

=item news://comp.music.research

=item news://rec.music.compose

=item news://gnu.announce

=item news://comp.os.linux.announce

=back

=head2 Mailing lists

For programs which are part of the GNU music project, the following
mailing list have been setup:

=over 4

=item info-gnu-music@gnu.org

A moderated list for information on the GNU Music project, to
subscribe: send mail with subject "subscribe" to
info-gnu-music-request@gnu.org.  

As this list is moderated, normal people should ask to drl@gnu.org or
hanwen@stack.nl to forward announces instead of sending it to
info-gnu-music@gnu.org

=item help-gnu-music@gnu.org

For help with programs from the GNU music project. To subscribe: send
mail with subject "subscribe" to
help-gnu-music-request@gnu.org

=item bug-gnu-music@gnu.org

If you have bugreports, you should send them to this list. If you want
to read all bugreports, you should subscribe to this list.  To
subscribe: send mail with subject "subscribe" to
bug-gnu-music-request@gnu.org
	
=item gnu-music-discuss@gnu.org,

For discussions concerning the GNU Music project, to subscribe: send
mail with subject "subscribe" to
gnu-music-discuss-request@gnu.org

=back

Announces of new versions will be sent to info-gnu-music and
gnu-music-discuss.


=head2 Backlinks

=over 4

=item http://www.ssc.com/linux/

The Number One Free Operating System Kernel: Linux 

=item http://www.bright.net/~dlphilp/linux_soundapps.html

Dave Philips' Linux sound applications page

=item http://www.medieval.org/emfaq/scores/software.html

More software for (early) music.

=item http://www.emry.net/webwatcher/

The Linux webwatcher: this site logs changes in important Linux sites.

=item http://www.pbm.com/~lindahl/ravenscroft/modern

Transcriptions of the music of Thomas Ravenscroft, partly using
LilyPond

=item http://www.redhat.com/

RedHat Software Inc. develops and markets a GNU/Linux distribution (of
which we are avid users)


=back
