=head1 NAME

Literature -- reading on music engraving, typesetting, etc.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A list of resources on music printing/writing and engraving.  Please
note that don't have access to most material.

[Personal comments appear in brackets.  What I (HWN) know, I've
commented myself. They are just my personal comments, not to be taken
too seriously]

=head2 Music engraving: references

Helene Wanske. ``Musiknotation --- Von der Syntax des Notenstichs zum
EDV-gesteuerten Notensatz'', Schott-Verlag, Mainz 1988.  ISBN
3-7957-2886-x.

[I. A very thorough overview of engraving practices of various
craftsmen. It includes detailed specs of characters, dimensions etc.
II. a thorough overview of a anonymous (by now antiquated) automated
system. EDV Means e(lektronischen) D(aten)v(erarbeitung), electronic
data processing HWN]

Maxwell Weaner and Walter Boelke. ``Standard Music Notation Practice'',
revised edition by Arnold Broido and Daniel Dorff. Music Publisher's
Association of the United States Inc., 1993.

Ted Ross. ``Teach yourself the art of music engraving and processing''
(3rd edition). Hansen House, Miami Beach, FLorida.

[This is about engraving, i.e.  professional typesetting.  It contains
directions on good typesetting, but the sections on reproduction
technicalities, how to use pens and history are interesting.
Especially the section on Music Typewriters is amusing HWN]

Gardner Read. ``Modern Rhythmic Notation.'' Indiana University Press,
1978.

[Sound (boring) review of the various hairy rhythmic notations used by
avant-garde composers HWN]

Gardner Read. ``Music Notation: a Manual of Modern Practice'' (2nd
edition). Taplinger Publishing, New York. (Out of print)

[This is as close to the ``standard'' reference work for music
notation issues as one is likely to get. MB]

Karl Hader. ``Aus der Werkstatt eines Notenstechers'' Waldheim--Eberle
Verlag, Vienna 1948

[Hader was the chief-engraver of the Waldheim-Eberle music publishers.
This book contains the most important rules on engraving (according to
[Chlapik])]

MPA. Standard music notation specifications for computer programming.
December 1996

[Pamphlet explaining some fine points in music font design HWN]

D. Roush. ``Music Formatting Guidelines,'' Technical Report
OSU-CISRC-3/88-TR10, Department of Computer and Information Science,
The Ohio State University, 1988.

[Rules on formatting music formulated for use in computers. Mainly
distilled from [Ross] HWN]


=head2 Notation with computers

Donald Byrd. ``Music Notation by Computer''.  Dissertation Indiana
University, 1985.

Donald Byrd. ``A System for Music Printing by Computer.''  Computers
and the Humanities, 8 (1974), 161-72.

Leland Smith. ``Editing and Printing Music by Computer.''  Journal of
Music Theory, 17 (1973), 292-309.

[If I remember correctly, this was concerned more with an input
language than with the typography. SP.]

David A Gomberg. ``A Computer-Oriented System for Music Printing.''
Dissertation Washington University. 1975.

Walter B Hewlett. and Eleanor Selfridge-Field. ``Directory of Computer
Assisted Research in Musicology''.  Menlo Park, CA: Center for Computer
Assisted Research in the Humanities.

[Annual editions since 1985, many containing surveys of music
typesetting technology. SP]

David A.  Gomberg; ``A Computer-oriented System for Music Printing.''
Computers and the Humanities, Vol.11, pp 63-80.

John S. Gourlay. ``Spacing a Line of Music,'' Technical Report
OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR35, Department of Computer and Information Science,
The Ohio State University, 1987.

[Algorithm for generating spacing in one line of (polyphonic) music,
tailored for use with MusiCopy. LilyPond uses a variant of it (as of
pl 76) HWN]

Allen Parish, Wael A. Hegazy, John S. Gourlay, Dean K. Roush and
F. Javier Sola. ``MusiCopy: An automated Music Formatting System''.
Technical Report OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR29, Department of Computer and
Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

[A brief overview of MusiCopy HWN]

John S. Gourlay, A. Parrish, D. Roush, F. Sola, Y. Tien. ``Computer
Formatting of Music,'' Technical Report OSU-CISRC-2/87-TR3, Department
of Computer and Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

[This paper discusses the development of algorithms for the formatting
of musical scores (from abstract). It also appeared at PROTEXT III,
Ireland 1986]

Wael A. Hegazy. ``On the Implementation of the MusiCopy Language
Processor,'' Technical Report OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR34, Department of
Computer and Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

[Describes the "parser" which converts MusiCopy MDL  to MusiCopy
Simultaneities & columns HWN]

Wael A. Hegazy and John S. Gourlay. ``Optimal line breaking in
music''.  Technical Report OSU-CISRC-8/87-TR33, Department of Computer
and Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987

[This generalizes TeX's breaking algorithm to music. It also appeared in
Document Manipulation and Typography, J.C. van Vliet (ed) 1988. HWN]

Dean K. Roush. ``Using MusiCopy''. Technical Report
OSU-CISRC-18/87-TR31, Department of Computer and Information Science,
The Ohio State University, 1987

[User manual of MusiCopy. Includes an impressive example piece.  HWN.]

A. Parrish and John S. Gourlay. ``Computer Formatting of Musical
Simultaneities,'' Technical Report OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR28, Department of
Computer and Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

[Placement of balls, stems, dots which occur at the same moment
("Simultaneity") HWN]

F. Sola. ``Computer Design of Musical Slurs, Ties and Phrase Marks,''
Technical Report OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR32, Department of Computer and
Information Science, The Ohio State University, 1987.

[Overview of a procedure for generating slurs HWN]

F. Sola and D. Roush. ``Design of Musical Beams,'' Technical Report
OSU-CISRC-10/87-TR30, Department of Computer and Information Science,
The Ohio State University, 1987.

[Calculating beam slopes HWN]

John. S. Gourlay. ``A language for music printing'', Communications
of the ACM, Vol. 29(5), 388--401, 1986.

[This paper describes the MusiCopy musicsetting system and an input
language to go with it. HWN]

Dorothea Blostein and Lippold Haken. ``The Lime Music Editor: A Diagram
Editor Involving Complex Translations'', Software Practice and
Experience, Vol. 24, No. 3, March 1994, pp. 289-306.

[A description of various conversions, decisions and issues relating
to this interactive editor HWN]

Lippold Haken and Dorothea Blostein. ``The Tilia Music Representation:
Extensibility, Abstraction, and Notation Contexts for the Lime Music
Editor'', Computer Music Journal, Vol. 17, No. 3, 1993, pp. 43-58

[A description of Lime internals (which resemble older (before
0.0.68pre) LilyPond data structures somewhat) HWN]

Lippold Haken and Dorothea Blostein. ``A New Algorithm for Horizontal
Spacing of Printed Music'', International Computer Music Conference,
Banff, Sept. 1995, pp. 118-119.

[This describes an algorithm which uses springs between adjacent
columns. This algorithm is a "subclass" of the LilyPond algorithm. HWN]

Dorothea Blostein and Lippold Haken. ``Justification of Printed Music'',
Communications of the ACM, VolJ34, No. 3, March 1991, pp. 88-99.

[This paper provides a shallow overview of the algorithm used in LIME
for spacing individual lines. HWN]

Gary M. Rader. ``Creating Printed Music Automatically''. Computer Vol
29(6), June 1996, pp 61--69.

[Describes a system called MusicEase, and explains that it uses
"constraints" (which go unexplained) to automatically position various
elements. HWN]

Stephen Dowland Page. ``Computer Tools for Music Information
Retrieval''.  Dissertation University of Oxford, 1988.

[Don't ask Stephen for a copy. Write to the Bodleian Library, Oxford,
or to the British Library, instead. SP]

Ren\'e Roelofs. ``Een Geautomatiseerd Systeem voor het Afdrukken van
Muziek'' afstudeerscriptie Bestuurlijke informatica, no 45327, Erasmus
universiteit Rotterdam, 1991.  (``An automated system for printing
music'' Master's Thesis Managerial Computer Science.)

[This dutch thesis describes a simplistic (monophonic) typesetting system,
and focuses on the breaking algorithm, which is taken from Hegazy &
Gourlay HWN]

Miguel Filgueiras and Jos\'e Paulo Leal. ``Representation and
manipulation of music documents in SceX''.  Electronic Publishing,
vol. 6 (4), 507--518, 1993.

Eric Foxley, ``Music --- A language for typesetting music scores''.
Software --- Practice and Experience, Vol. 17(8), 485--502, 1987.

[A paper on a TROFF preprocessor to typeset music. The output shown is
not very sophisticated, and contains some typographical atrocities HWN]

Miguel Filgueiras. ``Implementing a Symbolic Music Processing
System''. LIACC, Universidade do Porto, 1996; submitted.

Miguel Filgueiras. ``Some Music Typesetting Algorithms''. LIACC,
Universidade do Porto, forthcoming.

=head2 Engraving: further reading

Tom Gerou and Linda Lusk. ``Essential Dictionary of Music Notation''
Alfred Publishing, Van Nuys CA, 1996.  ISBN 0-88284-768-6.

[A concise, alphabetically ordered list of typesetting and music
(notation) issues with a rather simplistic attitude but in most 
cases "good-enough" answers JCN]

Herbert Chlapik. ``Die Praxis des Notengraphikers''. Doblinger, 1987.
ISBN 3-9000 035-96-2.

[An clearly written book for the casually interested reader. It shows
some of the conventions and difficulties in printing music HWN]

The University of Colorado Music Engraving page.
http://obenamots.cc.colorado.edu/Musicpress/engraving.html

[Webpages about engraving (designed with finale users in mind) (sic) HWN]

Richard Rastall. ``The Notation of Western Music: an
Introduction''. J. M. Dent & Sons London, 1983

[Interesting account of the evolution and origin of common notation
starting from neumes, and ending with modern innovations HWN]

Anthony Donato. Preparing Music Manuscript. Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice-Hall, 1963.

Donemus. ``Uitgeven van muziek''. Donemus Amsterdam, 1900

George Heussenstamm. ``The Norton Manual of Music Notation''. New York:
Norton, 1987.

Erdhard Karkoshka. ``Notation in New Music. Trans. Ruth
Koenig''. Praeger Publishers, New York, 1972.  (Out of print)

C. Roemer, ``The Art of Music Copying''. Roerick music co., Sherman Oaks
(CA), 1973.

Glen Rosecrans. ``Music Notation Primer''. New York: Passantino, 1979.

Kurt Stone. ``Music Notation in the Twentieth Century''. New York: Norton,
1980.  (Out of print)



=head2 Other stuff


Peter S. Langston. ``Unix music tools at Bellcore''.  Software ---
Practice and Experience, Vol. 20(S1), S1/47--S1/61, 1990.

[This paper deals with some command-line tools for music editing and
playback. It doesn't mention notation issues, but does come with the
grand idea (not) of using music to monitor complex systems. Imagine
your nuclear plant supervisor to use AC/DC for checking the reactor HWN]


=head2 File formats

Howard Wright <Howard.Wright@ed.ac.uk>, ``how to read and write tab: a
guide to tab notation''.
http://wabakimi.carleton.ca/~phacket2/guitar/tabfaq.html

[FAQ (with answers) about TAB, the ASCII variant of Tablature. HWN]

Cindy Grande, ``NIFF6a Notation Interchange File Format''.  Grande
Software Inc., 1995.  http://www.jtauber.com/music/encoding/niff/

[Specs for NIFF, a comprehensive but binary (yuk) format for notation HWN]

SMDL, Standard Musical Description Language,
ftp://ftp.ornl.gov/pub/sgml/wg8/smdl/10743.pdf. ISO/IEC DIS 10743. 

[An ISO defined SGML language. A much more thorough treatment of music
definition than Mudela  (but not suited for manual entry). It deals
with notation and perfomance issues by (basically) saying "You can
embed a MIDI or NIFF file" (sic) HWN]

MPDL,

HMSL, Hierarchical Music Structured Language, 

DARMS, 

enigma, 

=head1 AUTHORS

References and comments contributed by Han-Wen Nienhuys (HWN), Miguel
Filgueiras, Mark Basinski (MB), Dorothea Blostein, Stephen Page (SP),
Jan Nieuwenhuizen (JCN), Peter Kerr.

This should really be redone in BibTeX

