=head1 NAME 

Mutopia project - manifesto

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Random ranting about the Mutopia project, aka "Music To the People." 

This is the ultimate goal which I want to accomplish using LilyPond
and mudela. 

=head1 WHY

Music publishers make lots of money out of selling sheet music which
is in the public domain (the composers died a long time ago). It is
usually prohibited to xerox the sheet music.  Publishers have two
arguments to justify this policy: the high prices are there to
guarantee diversity (keeping lots of it in stock is expensive), and to
encourage new work being composed.

This is bad. Storing a Mudela file takes almost no space at all, and
if sheet music could be had for free, then it would be much easier
obtain less famous music.  These composers have died long ago, and not
having their music available only discourages people from
experimenting with it.  You deserve to get public domain music for
free (zero cents)

=head1 WHAT 

For literature, the project Gutenberg has an archive of public domain
literary works. For music, this does not exist yet.

We also need an archive of public domain sheet music; this is what we
call The Mutopia Project.


=head1 STATUS

This project is still in its vapourware stage, so don't ask questions
unless you want to put in effort into The GNU Music project.

Just as an aside, the LilyPond package includes the following music:

=over 4

=item *

J.S. Bach, Das Wohltemperierte Clavier I: C major Prelude & Fugue, C
minor fugue.  Solo cello suites: suite II, menuetto (alto version).
Six small preludes: some preludes.

=item *

F. Schubert, St\"andchen (Serenade) "Leise flehen meine Lieder"

=item *

Tarquinio Merula, La Gallina a 2 violini

=back
