=head1 NAME 

Other-packages -- related packages 

=head1 DESCRIPTION 

A (not-at-all complete) overview of other music-typesetting/notation
packages. Feel free to add info (and mail it to me).  

=head2 Free packages (with source)

=over 4

=item Rosegarden, http://www.bath.ac.uk/~masjpf/rose.html.

A Notation editor/Sequencer for X. Also outputs musictex.

=item Common Notation,
http://www-ccrma.stanford.edu/CCRMA/Software/cmn/cmn.html

A versatile lisp package. Part of the Common Music system. Input is in
Lisp. It needs the Adobe Sonata or Finale Petrucci font.

=item Vivace, http://www.calband.berkeley.edu/~gmeeker/vivace

A amateurish notation program for TclTk and X.

=item MPP

A preprocessor to MusixTeX by Jan Nieuwenhuizen and Han-Wen Nienhuys.
It is outdated by its successor, LilyPond.  MPP is still available via
the CTAN archive.

=item LilyPond, http://www.cs.ruu.nl/people/hanwen/lilypond/index.html

Added for completeness. You are currently reading her documentation.

=item Music, http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/Department/Staff/ef/printing.html

A TROFF preprocessor by Eric Foxley.

=item PMX, http://www.gmd.de/Misc/Music/

A Preprocessor for MusiXTeX by Don Simons.

=item M-Tx, 

A Preprocessor to PMX by Dirk Laurie.

=item Musictex, http://www.gmd.de/Misc/Music/

MusicTeX is a macro package for TeX to typeset polyphonic or
instrumental music.  It was originally written by Daniel Taupin.  

It includes a full-featured (but slightly unsightly) set of fonts.

=item MusiXTeX, http://www.gmd.de/Misc/Music/

A rewrite of MusicTeX, originally by Ross Mitchell and Andreas Egler. 
After quarrels,  MusiXTeX has been split into two branches:

=item MusiXTeX, http://www.gmd.de/Misc/Music/

Daniel Taupin's now maintains the branch that still carries 
the name MusiXTeX.

=item OpusTeX, http://www.inf.ethz.ch/personal/acherman/misc.html

Andreas Egler's branch is now called OpusTeX.

=item ABC2MTeX, http://www.gre.ac.uk/~c.walshaw/abc

A preprocessor to MusixTeX by Chris Walshaw for transcribing folk and
traditional music.

=item SceX http://www.ncc.up.pt/~mig/SceX.html

A preprocessor to MusixTeX by Miguel Filgueiras. Source in prolog
available on request. (?)

=item MUTEX, http://www.gmd.de/Misc/Music/

A TeX macro package for typesetting single-staff music by Angelika
Schofer & Andrea Steinbach. With some fonts.

=back

=head2 Free (zero cents)

=over 4

=item Calliope, http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/wfc/

A NeXT package by William F. Clocksin. Requires the Adobe Sonata font.

=back

=head2 Proprietary

=over 4

=item Scribe, http://adu1.adu.lattrobe.edu.au/Music/Scribe.html

A formatter for medieval scores.

=item Mup, http://www.arkkra.com/

A program which creates PS from a script input. Although it comes with
C source code, it is shareware.

=item MusicEase, http://mesa.colorado.edu/~grader/musicez.html 

Described in Computer vol 29(6). Shareware

=item LIME, http://datura.cerl.uiuc.edu/

Notation editor for W95 and Mac

=item Sibelius, http://www.acorn.co.uk/developers/sibelius/Home

Notation editor on Acorn machines.  Their developers call it ``best
notation program available''.  In any case, they are good at bragging.

=item [``EDV-Notensatz'']

URW's music-engraving system described by [Wanske].  (Although URW
used ~DM 1.000.000 while developing this, it didn't buy them a cute
name.)

=item Logic, http://www.emagic.com/

=item Finale

=item Score, http://www.ymusic.com/Score

Werner Lemberg <sx0005@sx2.hrz.uni-dortmund.de> writes:   I consider
SCORE as the best program for typesetting classical music. [..]  the
price is quite high (about US$ 1000) [..]  It has a graphical
interface but to get all out of the program you have to learn a 400
page manual almost by heart because you'll change most features by
inputting parameters (up to 20 for some items) on a command
line. Expect three months to master SCORE :-)


=item Personal Composer

=item Mozart, http://www.mozart.co.uk/

A shareware windows package  

=item Capella

=item Encore

=item Musicator

=item Noteworthy, http://www.ntworthy.com

Shareware.

=item WolfGang, http://www.unige.ch/lettres/armus/music/wolfgang.html

=item Amadeus, Jerker.Elsgard@abc.se

Jerker Elsgard <Jerker.Elsgard@abc.se> writes: professional and
expensive (DM 4000,--) engraving.  Designed as a batch program (like
LilyPond).  It is aimed at publishers. Its history is more than
fifteen years and Amadeus has been running under different Unix
clones.  It uses MIDI-keyboard input

=back

=head2 Unknown

=over 4

=item MusE, [no WWW address known]

A-R Music Engraving, by A-R Editions, Inc. Professional engraving on
Sun boxen.

=item MusiCopy, [no WWW address]

A project at Ohio State university, which was discontinued in 1987.
The technical reports that have resulted from MusiCopy can still be
obtained by writing to OSU department of Computer Science.


=item Berlioz, http://www.?.fr/

Dominique Montel (a professional music typesetter) is now working
together with computer scientists on his own software for music
publishing, called "Berlioz".

=back

=head2 Other stuff

=over 4

=item Sonata, http://www.adobe.com/type/browser/F/F_SONA.html

The music font by Adobe.

=item Haskore, http://haskell.systemsz.cs.yale.edu/haskore/onlinetutorial/index.html

A programming system for music, based on Haskell, a functional
programming language.  It outputs MIDI, CSound, NeXTStep MusicKit and
CMN.



=back


