=head1 NAME

The Homepage of LilyPond -- the GNU Project music typesetter

=head1 DESCRIPTION

LilyPond is the GNU Project music typesetter.  This program can print
beautiful sheet music from a music definition file.  It can also play
a play (mechanical) performances to a MIDI file.  Features include
multiple staffs, meters, clefs, keys, lyrics, versatile
input-language, cadenzas, beams, slurs, triplets.  It includes a nice
font of musical symbols.

This is not a Fanmail/Hype page. These pages were entirely created from
the LilyPond package-sources. 

Note: These pages are created from the latest B<development snapshots>
of LilyPond, specifically, this page was made from LilyPond
@TOPLEVEL_VERSION@.

=head2 Mirrors

=over 4

=item http://sca.uwaterloo.ca/lilypond/

Eric Praetzel was kind enough to provide a mirror of both the website
and the ftp site.  

=back

=head2 Examples

=over 4

=item *
<a href=input/out-www/index.html
>
short examples of what LilyPond can do: MIDI, PS, .gif and input.
</a
>

=item *
<a href=mutopia/out-www/index.html
>
examples of what LilyPond can do
with real music: MIDI, PS, .gif and input 
</a
>

=back

=head2 NEWS! 

This is what the latest version brings:

top_of_NEWS

Go get it at ftp://pcnov095.win.tue.nl/pub/lilypond/development/lilypond-@TOPLEVEL_VERSION@.tar.gz

=head2 Documentation: Introduction

=over 4

=item *
<a href=Documentation/out-www/index.html
>
All of the LilyPond documentation.
</a
>

=item *
<a href=docxx/index.html
>
The DOC++ documentation of the C++ sources. 
</a
>




=back
