\input texinfo @c -*- coding: utf-8; mode: texinfo; -*-
@ignore
    Translation of GIT committish: FILL-IN-HEAD-COMMITTISH

    When revising a translation, copy the HEAD committish of the
    version that you are working on.  See TRANSLATION for details.
@end ignore

@setfilename web.info
@settitle LilyPond -- Music notation for everyone
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@afourpaper

@set FDL
@set web
@include macros.itexi

@ifset web_version
foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo foo
@end ifset

@afourpaper

@c don't remove this comment.
@ignore
@omfcreator Graham Percival and Patrick McCarty
@omfdescription General info about the LilyPond music engraving system
@omftype program usage
@omfcategory Applications|Publishing
@omflanguage English
@end ignore

@c `Web' was imported 2009-08-05 with git commit b938d71...
@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2009 by the authors.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying


@c TITLE PAGE
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top LilyPond... music notation for everyone
@end ifnottex


@c hack for texi2html, bleh -gp
@ifnothtml

@finalout

@titlepage
@title LilyPond
@subtitle The music typesetter
@titlefont{General Information}
@author The LilyPond development team

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @vskip 20pt

@insertcopying{}

For LilyPond version @version{}
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml
@c end hack for texi2html


@c ************************ WEBSITE START ***************


@divId{pageHeader}
@heading LilyPond

... music notation for everyone
@divEnd

@c @imageId{cmws,web-clef-g-eight-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}
@imageId{lilylogo,double-lily-modified3,png,LilyPond logo}
@c @im ageId{cmws,web-snippet-alpha.png,Catchy Musical Web Snippet}

@divId{quickSummary}
@subheading What is LilyPond?

LilyPond is an open-source music engraving program, devoted to
producing the highest-quality sheet music possible.  This free
software brings the aesthetics of traditionally engraved music to
computer printouts.

@divClass{align-right}
Read more in our @ref{Introduction}!

@divEnd
@divEnd

@divClass{separator}
@divEnd


@divId{news}

@c TODO: generate this automatically, including RSS feed.
@include web/news-front.itexi

@divClass{float-right}
(@ref{Old news})
@divEnd

@divEnd


@divId{latestVersion}
@subheading Quick links

@c TODO: javascript to detect OS and suggest download?

@subsubheading Stable

@ref{Download, Download @versionStable}

@ref{Manuals, Manuals @versionStable}

@subsubheading Unstable

@ref{Development, Download @versionDevel}

@ref{Development, Manuals @versionDevel}

@divEnd


@ifnottex

@divClass{hide}
@menu
* Introduction::     Start here to creating sheet music.
* Download::         Get LilyPond.
* Manuals::          Read The Fine Manuals (RTFM).
* Community::        Contact other users.
@end menu
@divEnd

@end ifnottex

@contents


@c ****************** GENERAL STUFF FOR INFO ************
@ignore
Distributions will want to install lilypond.info in postinstall, doing:

    install-info --info-dir=/usr/share/info out[-www]/lilypond-web.info

  * Prepend GNU for dir, must be unique.

  * Do not list the `lilypond' node at toplevel, so that `info lilypond'
    goes to Top.

  * List all commands in direntry.

@c  * lilypond: (lilypond-application)Running LilyPond.      Invoking the
@c    LilyPond  program.
@end ignore

@c Info files are no longer installed in a subdirectory, images are
@c expected to be found in lilypond/ subdirectory.
@dircategory GNU LilyPond --- the music typesetter
@direntry
* LilyPond Learning Manual: (lilypond-learning).  Start here.
* Music Glossary: (music-glossary).               For non-English users.
* LilyPond: (lilypond-notation).                           LilyPond Notation Reference.
* LilyPond Snippets: (lilypond-snippets).         Short tricks, tips, and examples.
* LilyPond Internals Reference: (lilypond-internals).  Definitions for tweaking.
* LilyPond Application Usage: (lilypond-application). Installing and running applications.
* LilyPond Website: (lilypond-general).    Preview of new website.
* abc2ly: (lilypond-application)Invoking abc2ly.      Importing ABC.      
* convert-ly: (lilypond-application)Updating files with convert-ly. Older LilyPond versions.
* etf2ly: (lilypond-application)Invoking etf2ly.      Importing Finale.
* lilypond-book: (lilypond-application)LilyPond-book. Integrating text and music.
* midi2ly: (lilypond-application)Invoking midi2ly.    Importing MIDI.
* musicxml2ly: (lilypond-application)Invoking musicxml2ly.  Importing MusicXML.
@end direntry


@include web/introduction.itexi
@include web/download.itexi
@include web/manuals.itexi
@include web/community.itexi


@bye
